Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications
Jie Zhou a, 1, Ganqu Cui a,1, Shengding Hu a, Zhengyan Zhang a, Cheng Yang b, Zhiyuan Liu a, *,
Lifeng Wang c, Changcheng Li c, Maosong Sun a
a Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
b School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
c Tencent Incorporation, Shenzhen, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Deep learning
Graph neural network
ABSTRACT
Lots of learning tasks require dealing with graph data which contains rich relation information among elements.
Modeling physics systems, learning molecular ﬁngerprints, predicting protein interface, and classifying diseases
demand a model to learn from graph inputs. In other domains such as learning from non-structural data like texts
and images, reasoning on extracted structures (like the dependency trees of sentences and the scene graphs of
images) is an important research topic which also needs graph reasoning models. Graph neural networks (GNNs)
are neural models that capture the dependence of graphs via message passing between the nodes of graphs. In
recent years, variants of GNNs such as graph convolutional network (GCN), graph attention network (GAT), graph
recurrent network (GRN) have demonstrated ground-breaking performances on many deep learning tasks. In this
survey, we propose a general design pipeline for GNN models and discuss the variants of each component, sys-
tematically categorize the applications, and propose four open problems for future research.
1. Introduction
Graphs are a kind of data structure which models a set of objects
(nodes) and their relationships (edges). Recently, researches on
analyzing graphs with machine learning have been receiving more and
more attention because of the great expressive power of graphs, i.e.
graphs can be used as denotation of a large number of systems across
various areas including social science (social networks ( Wu et al., 2020 ),
natural science (physical systems ( Sanchez et al., 2018 ; Battaglia et al.,
2016) and protein-protein interaction networks ( Fout et al., 2017 )),
knowledge graphs ( Hamaguchi et al., 2017 ) and many other research
areas ( Khalil et al., 2017 ). As a unique non-Euclidean data structure for
machine learning, graph analysis focuses on tasks such as node classi ﬁ-
cation, link prediction, and clustering. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are
deep learning based methods that operate on graph domain. Due to its
convincing performance, GNN has become a widely applied graph
analysis method recently. In the following paragraphs, we will illustrate
the fundamental motivations of graph neural networks.
The ﬁrst motivation of GNNs roots in the long-standing history of
neural networks for graphs. In the nineties, Recursive Neural Networks
are ﬁrst utilized on directed acyclic graphs ( Sperduti and Starita, 1997 ;
Frasconi et al., 1998 ). Afterwards, Recurrent Neural Networks and
Feedforward Neural Networks are introduced into this literature
respectively in ( Scarselli et al., 2009 ) and ( Micheli, 2009 ) to tackle cy-
cles. Although being successful, the universal idea behind these methods
is building state transition systems on graphs and iterate until conver-
gence, which constrained the extendability and representation ability.
Recent advancement of deep neural networks, especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) ( LeCun et al., 1998 ) result in the rediscovery of
GNNs. CNNs have the ability to extract multi-scale localized spatial
features and compose them to construct highly expressive representa-
tions, which led to breakthroughs in almost all machine learning areas
and started the new era of deep learning ( LeCun et al., 2015). The keys of
CNNs are local connection, shared weights and the use of multiple layers
(LeCun et al., 2015 ). These are also of great importance in solving
problems on graphs. However, CNNs can only operate on regular
Euclidean data like images (2D grids) and texts (1D sequences) while
these data structures can be regarded as instances of graphs. Therefore, it
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: zhoujie18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (J. Zhou), cgq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (G. Cui), hsd20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn (S. Hu), zy-z19@mails.
tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Zhang), albertyang33@gmail.com (C. Yang), liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn (Z. Liu), fandywang@tencent.com (L. Wang), harrychli@tencent.com
(C. Li), sms@tsinghua.edu.cn (M. Sun).
1 indicates equal contribution.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
AI Open
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/ai-open
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001
Received 16 September 2020; Received in revised form 15 December 2020; Accepted 27 January 2021
2666-6510/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
is straightforward to generalize CNNs on graphs. As shown in Fig. 1, it is
hard to de ﬁne localized convolutional ﬁlters and pooling operators,
which hinders the transformation of CNN from Euclidean domain to
non-Euclidean domain. Extending deep neural models to non-Euclidean
domains, which is generally referred to as geometric deep learning, has
been an emerging research area ( Bronstein et al., 2017 ). Under this
umbrella term, deep learning on graphs receives enormous attention.
The other motivation comes from graph representation learning (Cui
et al., 2018a; Hamilton et al., 2017b; Zhang et al., 2018a; Cai et al., 2018;
Goyal and Ferrara, 2018 ), which learns to represent graph nodes, edges
or subgraphs by low-dimensional vectors. In the ﬁeld of graph analysis,
traditional machine learning approaches usually rely on hand engineered
features and are limited by its in ﬂexibility and high cost. Following the
idea of representation learning and the success of word embedding
(Mikolov et al., 2013 ), DeepWalk ( Perozzi et al., 2014 ), regarded as the
ﬁrst graph embedding method based on representation learning, applies
SkipGram model ( Mikolov et al., 2013 ) on the generated random walks.
Similar approaches such as node2vec ( Grover and Leskovec, 2016), LINE
(Tang et al., 2015 ) and TADW ( Yang et al., 2015 ) also achieved break-
throughs. However, these methods suffer from two severe drawbacks
(Hamilton et al., 2017b ). First, no parameters are shared between nodes
in the encoder, which leads to computationally inef ﬁciency, since it
means the number of parameters grows linearly with the number of
nodes. Second, the direct embedding methods lack the ability of gener-
alization, which means they cannot deal with dynamic graphs or
generalize to new graphs.
Based on CNNs and graph embedding, variants of graph neural net-
works (GNNs) are proposed to collectively aggregate information from
graph structure. Thus they can model input and/or output consisting of
elements and their dependency.
There exists several comprehensive reviews on graph neural net-
works. Bronstein et al. (2017) provide a thorough review of geometric
deep learning, which presents its problems, dif ﬁculties, solutions, ap-
plications and future directions. Zhang et al. (2019a) propose another
comprehensive overview of graph convolutional networks. However,
they mainly focus on convolution operators de ﬁned on graphs while we
investigate other computation modules in GNNs such as skip connections
and pooling operators.
Papers by Zhang et al. (2018b), Wu et al. (2019a), Chami et al. (2020)
are the most up-to-date survey papers on GNNs and they mainly focus on
models of GNN. Wu et al. (2019a) categorize GNNs into four groups:
recurrent graph neural networks, convolutional graph neural networks,
graph autoencoders, and spatial-temporal graph neural networks. Zhang
et al. (2018b) give a systematic overview of different graph deep learning
methods and Chami et al. (2020) propose a Graph Encoder Decoder
Model to unify network embedding and graph neural network models.
Our paper provides a different taxonomy with them and we mainly focus
on classic GNN models. Besides, we summarize variants of GNNs for
different graph types and also provide a detailed summary of GNNs ’
applications in different domains.
There have also been several surveys focusing on some speci ﬁc graph
learning ﬁelds. Sun et al. (2018) and Chen et al. (2020a) give detailed
overviews for adversarial learning methods on graphs, including graph
data attack and defense. Lee et al. (2018a) provide a review over graph
attention models. The paper proposed by Yang et al. (2020) focuses on
heterogeneous graph representation learning, where nodes or edges are
of multiple types. Huang et al. (2020) review over existing GNN models
for dynamic graphs. Peng et al. (2020) summarize graph embeddings
methods for combinatorial optimization. We conclude GNNs for het-
erogeneous graphs, dynamic graphs and combinatorial optimization in
Section 4.2, Section 4.3, and Section 8.1.6 respectively.
In this paper, we provide a thorough review of different graph neural
network models as well as a systematic taxonomy of the applications. To
summarize, our contributions are:
/C15We provide a detailed review over existing graph neural network
models. We present a general design pipeline and discuss the variants
of each module. We also introduce researches on theoretical and
empirical analyses of GNN models.
/C15We systematically categorize the applications and divide the appli-
cations into structural scenarios and non-structural scenarios. We
present several major applications and their corresponding methods
for each scenario.
/C15We propose four open problems for future research. We provide a
thorough analysis of each problem and propose future research
directions.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present
a general GNN design pipeline. Following the pipeline, we discuss each
step in detail to review GNN model variants. The details are included in
Section 3 to Section 6. In Section 7, we revisit research works over
theoretical and empirical analyses of GNNs. In Section 8, we introduce
several major applications of graph neural networks applied to structural
scenarios, non-structural scenarios and other scenarios. In Section 9, we
propose four open problems of graph neural networks as well as several
future research directions. And ﬁnally, we conclude the survey in Section
10.
2. General design pipeline of GNNs
In this paper, we introduce models of GNNs in a designer view. Weﬁrst
present the general design pipeline for designing a GNN model in this
section. Then we give details of each step such as selecting computational
modules, considering graph type and scale, and designing loss function in
Section 3, 4, and 5 , respectively. And ﬁnally, we use an example to illus-
trate the design process of GNN for a speci ﬁc task in Section 6.
Fig. 1. Left: image in Euclidean space. Right: graph in non-Euclidean space.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
58
In later sections, we denote a graph as G ¼ð V;EÞ, where jVj ¼ N is the
number of nodes in the graph and jEj¼ Ne is the number of edges. A 2
RN/C2N is the adjacency matrix. For graph representation learning, we use
hv and ov as the hidden state and output vector of node v. The detailed
descriptions of the notations could be found in Table 1.
In this section, we present the general design pipeline of a GNN model
for a speci ﬁc task on a speci ﬁc graph type. Generally, the pipeline con-
tains four steps: (1) ﬁnd graph structure, (2) specify graph type and scale,
(3) design loss function and (4) build model using computational mod-
ules. We give general design principles and some background knowledge
in this section. The design details of these steps are discussed in later
sections.
2.1. Find graph structure
At ﬁrst, we have to ﬁnd out the graph structure in the application.
There are usually two scenarios: structural scenarios and non-structural
scenarios. In structural scenarios, the graph structure is explicit in the
applications, such as applications on molecules, physical systems,
knowledge graphs and so on. In non-structural scenarios, graphs are
implicit so that we have to ﬁrst build the graph from the task, such as
building a fully-connected “word” graph for text or building a scene
graph for an image. After we get the graph, the later design process at-
tempts to ﬁnd an optimal GNN model on this speci ﬁc graph.
2.2. Specify graph type and scale
After we get the graph in the application, we then have to ﬁnd out the
graph type and its scale.
Graphs with complex types could provide more information on nodes
and their connections. Graphs are usually categorized as:
/C15Directed/Undirected Graphs. Edges in directed graphs are all
directed from one node to another, which provide more information
than undirected graphs. Each edge in undirected graphs can also be
regarded as two directed edges.
/C15Homogeneous/Heterogeneous Graphs. Nodes and edges in ho-
mogeneous graphs have same types, while nodes and edges have
different types in heterogeneous graphs. Types for nodes and edges
play important roles in heterogeneous graphs and should be further
considered.
/C15Static/Dynamic Graphs. When input features or the topology of the
graph vary with time, the graph is regarded as a dynamic graph. The
time information should be carefully considered in dynamic graphs.
Note these categories are orthogonal, which means these types can be
combined, e.g. one can deal with a dynamic directed heterogeneous
graph. There are also several other graph types designed for different
tasks such as hypergraphs and signed graphs. We will not enumerate all
types here but the most important idea is to consider the additional in-
formation provided by these graphs. Once we specify the graph type, the
additional information provided by these graph types should be further
considered in the design process.
As for the graph scale, there is no clear classi ﬁcation criterion for
“small” and “large” graphs. The criterion is still changing with the
development of computation devices (e.g. the speed and memory of
GPUs). In this paper, when the adjacency matrix or the graph Laplacian of
a graph (the space complexity is Oðn2Þ) cannot be stored and processed
by the device, then we regard the graph as a large-scale graph and then
some sampling methods should be considered.
2.3. Design loss function
In this step we should design the loss function based on our task type
and the training setting.
For graph learning tasks, there are usually three kinds of tasks:
/C15Node-level tasks focus on nodes, which include node classi ﬁcation,
node regression, node clustering, etc. Node classi ﬁcation tries to
categorize nodes into several classes, and node regression predicts a
continuous value for each node. Node clustering aims to partition the
nodes into several disjoint groups, where similar nodes should be in
the same group.
/C15Edge-level tasks are edge classi ﬁcation and link prediction, which
require the model to classify edge types or predict whether there is an
edge existing between two given nodes.
/C15Graph-level tasks include graph classi ﬁcation, graph regression, and
graph matching, all of which need the model to learn graph
representations.
From the perspective of supervision, we can also categorize graph
learning tasks into three different training settings:
/C15Supervised setting provides labeled data for training.
/C15Semi-supervised setting gives a small amount of labeled nodes and a
large amount of unlabeled nodes for training. In the test phase, the
transductive setting requires the model to predict the labels of the
given unlabeled nodes, while the inductive setting provides new
unlabeled nodes from the same distribution to infer. Most node and
edge classiﬁcation tasks are semi-supervised. Most recently, a mixed
transductive-inductive scheme is undertaken by Wang and Leskovec
(2020) and Rossi et al. (2018) , craving a new path towards the mixed
setting.
/C15Unsupervised setting only offers unlabeled data for the model to
ﬁnd patterns. Node clustering is a typical unsupervised learning task.
With the task type and the training setting, we can design a speci ﬁc
loss function for the task. For example, for a node-level semi-supervised
classiﬁcation task, the cross-entropy loss can be used for the labeled
nodes in the training set.
2.4. Build model using computational modules
Finally, we can start building the model using the computational
modules. Some commonly used computational modules are:
Table 1
Notations used in this paper.
Notations Descriptions
Rm m-dimensional Euclidean space
a; a; A Scalar, vector and matrix
AT Matrix transpose
IN Identity matrix of dimension N
gw ⋆ x Convolution of gw and x
N, Nv Number of nodes in the graph
Ne Number of edges in the graph
N v Neighborhood set of node v
at
v Vector a of node v at time step t
hv Hidden state of node v
ht
v Hidden state of node v at time step t
ot
v Output of node v at time step t
evw Features of edge from node v to w
ek Features of edge with label k
Wi ; Ui ;
Wo ; Uo
Matrices for computing i; o:
bi ; bo Vectors for computing i; o
ρ An alternative non-linear function
σ The logistic sigmoid function
tanh The hyperbolic tangent function
LeakyReLU The LeakyReLU function
/C12 Element-wise multiplication operation
k Vector concatenation
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
59
/C15Propagation Module. The propagation module is used to propagate
information between nodes so that the aggregated information could
capture both feature and topological information. In propagation
modules, the convolution operator and recurrent operator are
usually used to aggregate information from neighbors while the skip
connection operation is used to gather information from historical
representations of nodes and mitigate the over-smoothing problem.
/C15Sampling Module. When graphs are large, sampling modules are
usually needed to conduct propagation on graphs. The sampling
module is usually combined with the propagation module.
/C15Pooling Module. When we need the representations of high-level
subgraphs or graphs, pooling modules are needed to extract infor-
mation from nodes.
With these computation modules, a typical GNN model is usually
built by combining them. A typical architecture of the GNN model is
illustrated in the middle part of Fig. 2 where the convolutional operator,
recurrent operator, sampling module and skip connection are used to
propagate information in each layer and then the pooling module is
added to extract high-level information. These layers are usually stacked
to obtain better representations. Note this architecture can generalize
most GNN models while there are also exceptions, for example, NDCN
(Zang and Wang, 2020 ) combines ordinary differential equation systems
(ODEs) and GNNs. It can be regarded as a continuous-time GNN model
which integrates GNN layers over continuous time without propagating
through a discrete number of layers.
An illustration of the general design pipeline is shown in Fig. 2 . In
later sections, we ﬁrst give the existing instantiations of computational
modules in Section 3, then introduce existing variants which consider
different graph types and scale in Section 4. Then we survey on variants
designed for different training settings in Section 5. These sections
correspond to details of step (4), step (2), and step (3) in the pipeline. And
ﬁnally, we give a concrete design example in Section 6.
3. Instantiations of computational modules
In this section we introduce existing instantiations of three compu-
tational modules: propagation modules, sampling modules and pooling
modules. We introduce three sub-components of propagation modules:
convolution operator, recurrent operator and skip connection in Section
3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 respectively. Then we introduce sampling modules and
pooling modules in Section 3.4 and 3.5 . An overview of computational
modules is shown in Fig. 3.
3.1. Propagation modules - convolution operator
Convolution operators that we introduce in this section are the mostly
used propagation operators for GNN models. The main idea of convolu-
tion operators is to generalize convolutions from other domain to the
graph domain. Advances in this direction are often categorized as spec-
tral approaches and spatial approaches.
3.1.1. Spectral approaches
Spectral approaches work with a spectral representation of the
graphs. These methods are theoretically based on graph signal processing
(Shuman et al., 2013) and deﬁne the convolution operator in the spectral
domain.
In spectral methods, a graph signal x is ﬁrstly transformed to the
spectral domain by the graph Fourier transform F , then the convolution
operation is conducted. After the convolution, the resulted signal is
transformed back using the inverse graph Fourier transform F /C01. These
transforms are de ﬁned as:
F ðxÞ ¼ UT x;
F /C01ðxÞ¼ Ux: (1)
Here U is the matrix of eigenvectors of the normalized graph Laplacian
L ¼ IN /C0D/C01
2 AD/C01
2 (D is the degree matrix and A is the adjacency matrix
of the graph). The normalized graph Laplacian is real symmetric positive
semideﬁnite, so it can be factorized as L ¼ UΛUT (where Λ is a diagonal
matrix of the eigenvalues). Based on the convolution theorem ( Mallat,
1999), the convolution operation is de ﬁned as:
g ⋆ x ¼ F /C01ðF ðgÞ/C12F ðxÞÞ
¼ UðUT g /C12UT xÞ; (2)
where UT g is the ﬁlter in the spectral domain. If we simplify the ﬁlter by
Fig. 2. The general design pipeline for a GNN model.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
60
using a learnable diagonal matrix gw, then we have the basic function of
the spectral methods:
gw ⋆ x ¼ Ugw UT x: (3)
Next we introduce several typical spectral methods which design
different ﬁlters gw.
Spectral Network. Spectral network ( Bruna et al., 2014 ) uses a learn-
able diagonal matrix as the ﬁlter, that is gw ¼ diagðw Þ, where w 2 RN is
the parameter. However, this operation is computationally inef ﬁcient
and the ﬁlter is non-spatially localized. Henaff et al. (2015) attempt to
make the spectral ﬁlters spatially localized by introducing a parameter-
ization with smooth coef ﬁcients.
ChebNet. Hammond et al. (2011) suggest that gw can be approximated
by a truncated expansion in terms of Chebyshev polynomials TkðxÞ up to
Kth order. Defferrard et al. (2016) propose the ChebNet based on this
theory. Thus the operation can be written as:
gw ⋆ x /C25
XK
k¼0
wk Tk
/C16
~L
/C17
x; (4)
where ~L ¼ 2
λmax
L /C0IN , λmax denotes the largest eigenvalue of L. The range
of the eigenvalues in ~L is [-1, 1]. w 2 RK is now a vector of Chebyshev
coefﬁcients. The Chebyshev polynomials are de ﬁned as TkðxÞ¼
2xTk/C01ðxÞ/C0Tk/C02ðxÞ, with T0ðxÞ¼ 1 and T1ðxÞ¼ x. It can be observed
that the operation is K-localized since it is a Kth-order polynomial in the
Laplacian. Defferrard et al. (2016) use this K-localized convolution to
deﬁne a convolutional neural network which could remove the need to
compute the eigenvectors of the Laplacian.
GCN. Kipf and Welling (2017) simplify the convolution operation in
Eq. (4) with K ¼ 1 to alleviate the problem of over ﬁtting. They further
assume λmax /C252 and simplify the equation to
gw ⋆ x /C25w0x þ w1 ðL /C0IN Þx ¼ w0x /C0w1D/C01
2 AD/C01
2 x (5)
with two free parameters w0 and w1. With parameter constraint w ¼
w0 ¼/C0w1, we can obtain the following expression:
gw ⋆ x /C25w
0
@IN þ D/C01
2 AD/C01
2
1
Ax: (6)
GCN further introduces a renormalization trick to solve the exploding/
vanishing gradient problem in Eq. (6): IN þ D/C01
2 AD/C01
2 → ~D
/C01
2 ~A ~D
/C01
2
, with
Fig. 3. An overview of computational modules.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
61
~A ¼ A þ IN and ~Dii ¼ P
j
~Aij. Finally, the compact form of GCN is de ﬁned
as:
H ¼ ~D
/C01
2 ~A ~D
/C01
2
XW; (7)
where X 2 RN/C2F is the input matrix, W 2 RF/C2F
0
is the parameter and H 2
RN/C2F
0
is the convolved matrix. F and F
0
are the dimensions of the input
and the output, respectively. Note that GCN can also be regarded as a
spatial method that we will discuss later.
AGCN. All of these models use the original graph structure to denote
relations between nodes. However, there may have implicit relations
between different nodes. The Adaptive Graph Convolution Network
(AGCN) is proposed to learn the underlying relations ( Li et al., 2018a ).
AGCN learns a “residual” graph Laplacian and add it to the original
Laplacian matrix. As a result, it is proven to be effective in several
graph-structured datasets.
DGCN. The dual graph convolutional network (DGCN) ( Zhuang and
Ma, 2018) is proposed to jointly consider the local consistency and global
consistency on graphs. It uses two convolutional networks to capture the
local and global consistency and adopts an unsupervised loss to ensemble
them. The ﬁrst convolutional network is the same as Eq. (7), and the
second network replaces the adjacency matrix with positive pointwise
mutual information (PPMI) matrix:
H’ ¼ ρ
0
B@D
/C01
2
P APD
/C01
2
P HW
1
CA; (8)
where AP is the PPMI matrix and DP is the diagonal degree matrix of AP.
GWNN. Graph wavelet neural network (GWNN) ( Xu et al., 2019a )
uses the graph wavelet transform to replace the graph Fourier transform.
It has several advantages: (1) graph wavelets can be fastly obtained
without matrix decomposition; (2) graph wavelets are sparse and local-
ized thus the results are better and more explainable. GWNN outperforms
several spectral methods on the semi-supervised node classi ﬁcation task.
AGCN and DGCN try to improve spectral methods from the perspec-
tive of augmenting graph Laplacian while GWNN replaces the Fourier
transform. In conclusion, spectral approaches are well theoretically based
and there are also several theoretical analyses proposed recently (see
Section 7.1.1). However, in almost all of the spectral approaches
mentioned above, the learned ﬁlters depend on graph structure. That is to
say, the ﬁlters cannot be applied to a graph with a different structure and
those models can only be applied under the “transductive” setting of
graph tasks.
3.1.2. Basic spatial approaches
Spatial approaches deﬁne convolutions directly on the graph based on
the graph topology. The major challenge of spatial approaches is deﬁning
the convolution operation with differently sized neighborhoods and
maintaining the local invariance of CNNs.
Neural FPs. Neural FPs ( Duvenaud et al., 2015 ) uses different weight
matrices for nodes with different degrees:
t ¼ ht
v þ
X
u2N v
ht
u ;
htþ 1
v ¼ σ
/C16
tWtþ 1
jN v j
/C17
;
(9)
where Wtþ 1
jN v j is the weight matrix for nodes with degree jN vj at layer t þ
1. The main drawback of the method is that it cannot be applied to large-
scale graphs with more node degrees.
DCNN. The diffusion convolutional neural network (DCNN) ( Atwood
and Towsley, 2016 ) uses transition matrices to de ﬁne the neighborhood
for nodes. For node classi ﬁcation, the diffusion representations of each
node in the graph can be expressed as:
H ¼ fðWc /C12P* XÞ 2 RN/C2K/C2F ; (10)
where X 2 RN/C2F is the matrix of input features ( F is the dimension). P* is
an N /C2K /C2N tensor which contains the power series { P; P2, … , PK } of
matrix P. And P is the degree-normalized transition matrix from the
graphs adjacency matrix A. Each entity is transformed to a diffusion
convolutional representation which is a K /C2F matrix deﬁned by K hops
of graph diffusion over F features. And then it will be de ﬁned by a K /C2F
weight matrix and a non-linear activation function f.
PATCHY-SAN. The PATCHY-SAN model ( Niepert et al., 2016 ) ex-
tracts and normalizes a neighborhood of exactly k nodes for each node.
The normalized neighborhood serves as the receptive ﬁeld in the tradi-
tional convolutional operation.
LGCN. The learnable graph convolutional network (LGCN) (Gao et al.,
2018a) also exploits CNNs as aggregators. It performs max pooling on
neighborhood matrices of nodes to get top-k feature elements and then
applies 1-D CNN to compute hidden representations.
GraphSAGE. GraphSAGE ( Hamilton et al., 2017a ) is a general
inductive framework which generates embeddings by sampling and
aggregating features from a node ’s local neighborhood:
htþ 1
N v ¼ AGGtþ 1
/C0/C8
ht
u; 8u 2 N v
/C9/C1
;
htþ 1
v ¼ σ
/C16
Wtþ 1 /C1
h
ht
v k htþ 1
N v
i/C17
:
(11)
Instead of using the full neighbor set, GraphSAGE uniformly samples
a ﬁxed-size set of neighbors to aggregate information. AGG tþ 1 is the ag-
gregation function and GraphSAGE suggests three aggregators: mean
aggregator, LSTM aggregator, and pooling aggregator. GraphSAGE with
a mean aggregator can be regarded as an inductive version of GCN while
the LSTM aggregator is not permutation invariant, which requires a
speciﬁed order of the nodes.
3.1.3. Attention-based spatial approaches
The attention mechanism has been successfully used in many
sequence-based tasks such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015;
Gehring et al., 2017 ; Vaswani et al., 2017 ), machine reading ( Cheng
et al., 2016 ) and so on. There are also several models which try to
generalize the attention operator on graphs ( Velickovic et al., 2018 ;
Zhang et al., 2018c). Compared with the operators we mentioned before,
attention-based operators assign different weights for neighbors, so that
they could alleviate noises and achieve better results.
GAT. The graph attention network (GAT) ( Velickovic et al., 2018 )
incorporates the attention mechanism into the propagation step. It
computes the hidden states of each node by attending to its neighbors,
following a self-attention strategy. The hidden state of node v can be ob-
tained by:
htþ 1
v ¼ ρ
 X
u2N v
αvu Wht
u
!
;
αvu ¼ expðLeakyReLUðaT ½Whv k Whu /C138ÞÞX
k2N v
expðLeakyReLUðaT ½Whv k Whk /C138ÞÞ
;
(12)
where W is the weight matrix associated with the linear transformation
which is applied to each node, and a is the weight vector of a single-layer
MLP.
Moreover, GAT utilizes the multi-head attention used by Vaswani et al.
(2017) to stabilize the learning process. It applies K independent atten-
tion head matrices to compute the hidden states and then concatenates
their features (or computes the average), resulting in the following two
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
62
output representations:
htþ 1
v ¼k K
k¼1 σ
 X
u2N v
αk
vu Wk ht
u
!
;
htþ 1
v ¼ σ
 
1
K
XK
k¼1
X
u2N v
αk
vuWk ht
u
!
:
(13)
Here αk
ij is the normalized attention coef ﬁcient computed by the k-th
attention head. The attention architecture has several properties: (1) the
computation of the node-neighbor pairs is parallelizable thus the oper-
ation is ef ﬁcient; (2) it can be applied to graph nodes with different de-
grees by specifying arbitrary weights to neighbors; (3) it can be applied to
the inductive learning problems easily.
GaAN. The gated attention network (GaAN) (Zhang et al., 2018c) also
uses the multi-head attention mechanism. However, it uses a
self-attention mechanism to gather information from different heads to
replace the average operation of GAT.
3.1.4. General frameworks for spatial approaches
Apart from different variants of spatial approaches, several general
frameworks are proposed aiming to integrate different models into one
single framework. Monti et al. (2017) propose the mixture model
network (MoNet), which is a general spatial framework for several
methods deﬁned on graphs or manifolds. Gilmer et al. (2017) propose the
message passing neural network (MPNN), which uses message passing
functions to unify several variants. Wang et al. (2018a) propose the
non-local neural network (NLNN) which uni ﬁes several “self--
attention”-style methods (Hoshen, 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017; Velickovic
et al., 2018 ). Battaglia et al. (2018) propose the graph network (GN). It
deﬁnes a more general framework for learning node-level, edge-level and
graph-level representations.
MoNet. Mixture model network (MoNet) ( Monti et al., 2017 )i sa
spatial framework that try to uni ﬁes models for non-euclidean do-
mains, including CNNs for manifold and GNNs. The Geodesic CNN
(GCNN) ( Masci et al., 2015 ) and Anisotropic CNN (ACNN) ( Boscaini
et al., 2016 ) on manifolds or GCN ( Kipf and Welling, 2017 ) and DCNN
(Atwood and Towsley, 2016 ) on graphs can be formulated as partic-
ular instances of MoNet. In MoNet, each point on a manifold or each
vertex on a graph, denoted by v, is regarded as the origin of a
pseudo-coordinate system. The neighbors u 2 N v are associated with
pseudo-coordinates uðv; uÞ. Given two functions f ; g deﬁned on the
vertices of a graph (or points on a manifold), the convolution operator
in MoNet is de ﬁned as:
ðf ⋆ gÞ¼
XJ
j¼1
gjDjðvÞf;
DjðvÞf ¼
X
u2N v
wjðuðv; uÞÞfðuÞ:
(14)
Here w1ðuÞ; … ; wJ ðuÞ are the functions assigning weights for neighbors
according to their pseudo-coordinates. Thus the DjðvÞf is the aggregated
values of the neighbors ’functions. By de ﬁning different u and w , MoNet
can instantiate several methods. For GCN, the function f ; g map the nodes
to their features, the pseudo-coordinate for ðv; uÞ is uðv;uÞ ¼ ðj N vj;jN ujÞ,
J ¼ 1 and w1ðuðv;uÞÞ ¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jN v jjN u j
p . In MoNet’s own model, the parameters
wj are learnable.
MPNN. The message passing neural network (MPNN) ( Gilmer et al.,
2017) extracts the general characteristics among several classic models.
The model contains two phases: a message passing phase and a readout
phase. In the message passing phase, the model ﬁrst uses the message
function Mt to aggregate the “message” mt
v from neighbors and then uses
the update function Ut to update the hidden state ht
v:
mtþ 1
v ¼
X
u2N v
Mt
/C0
ht
v; ht
u; evu
/C1
;
htþ 1
v ¼ Ut
/C0
ht
v; mtþ 1
v
/C1
:
(15)
Here evu represents features of undirected edge ðv; uÞ. The readout phase
computes a feature vector of the whole graph using the readout function
R:
by ¼ R
/C0/C8
hT
v
/C12/C12v 2 G
/C9/C1
; (16)
where T denotes the total time steps. The message function Mt , vertex
update function Ut and readout function R may have different settings.
Hence the MPNN framework could instantiate several different models
via different function settings. Speciﬁc settings for different models could
be found in ( Gilmer et al., 2017 ).
NLNN. The non-local neural network (NLNN) generalizes and extends
the classic non-local mean operation ( Buades et al., 2005 ) in computer
vision. The non-local operation computes the hidden state at a position as
a weighted sum of features at all possible positions. The potential posi-
tions can be in space, time or spacetime. Thus the NLNN can be viewed as
a uni ﬁcation of different “self-attention”-style methods ( Hoshen, 2017 ;
Vaswani et al., 2017 ; Velickovic et al., 2018 ).
Following the non-local mean operation ( Buades et al., 2005 ), the
generic non-local operation is de ﬁned as
htþ 1
v ¼ 1
C ðhtÞ
X
8u
f
/C0
ht
v; ht
u
/C1
g
/C0
ht
u
/C1
; (17)
where u is the index of all possible positions for position v, f ðht
v; ht
uÞ
computes a scalar between v and u representing the relation between
them, gðht
uÞ denotes a transformation of the input ht
u and C ðht Þ is a
normalization factor. Different variants of NLNN can be de ﬁned by
different f and g settings and more details can be found in the original
paper (Buades et al., 2005 ).
Graph Network. The graph network (GN) ( Battaglia et al., 2018 ) is a
more general framework compared to others by learning node-level,
edge-level and graph level representations. It can unify many variants
like MPNN, NLNN, Interaction Networks ( Battaglia et al., 2016 ; Watters
et al., 2017 ), Neural Physics Engine ( Chang et al., 2017 ), CommNet
(Sukhbaatar Ferguset al., 2016 ), structure2vec ( Dai et al., 2016 ; Khalil
et al., 2017 ), GGNN ( Li et al., 2016 ), Relation Network ( Raposo et al.,
2017; Santoro et al., 2017), Deep Sets (Zaheer et al., 2017), Point Net (Qi
et al., 2017a ) and so on.
The core computation unit of GN is called the GN block. A GN block
deﬁnes three update functions and three aggregation functions:
etþ 1
k ¼ φe
/C16
et
k ; ht
rk ; ht
sk ; ut
/C17
; etþ 1
v ¼ ρe→h/C0
Etþ 1
v
/C1
;
htþ 1
v ¼ φh
/C18
etþ 1
v ; ht
v; ut
/C19
; etþ 1 ¼ ρe→u/C0
Etþ 1/C1
;
utþ 1 ¼ φu
/C16
etþ 1; h
tþ 1
; ut
/C17
; h
tþ 1
¼ ρh→u/C0
Htþ 1/C1
:
(18)
Here rk is the receiver node and sk is the sender node of edge k. Etþ 1 and
Htþ 1 are the matrices of stacked edge vectors and node vectors at time
step tþ 1, respectively. Etþ 1
v collects edge vectors with receiver node v. u
is the global attribute for graph representation. The φ and ρ functions can
have various settings and the ρ functions must be invariant to input or-
ders and should take variable lengths of arguments.
3.2. Propagation modules - recurrent operator
Recurrent methods are pioneers in this research line. The major dif-
ference between recurrent operators and convolution operators is that
layers in convolution operators use different weights while layers in
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
63
recurrent operators share same weights. Early methods based on recur-
sive neural networks focus on dealing with directed acyclic graphs
(Sperduti and Starita, 1997 ; Frasconi et al., 1998 ; Micheli et al., 2004 ;
Hammer et al., 2004 ). Later, the concept of graph neural network (GNN)
was ﬁrst proposed in ( Scarselli et al., 2009 ; Gori et al., 2005 ), which
extended existing neural networks to process more graph types. We name
the model as GNN in this paper to distinguish it with the general name.
We ﬁrst introduce GNN and its later variants which require convergence
of the hidden states and then we talk about methods based on the gate
mechanism.
3.2.1. Convergence-based methods
In a graph, each node is naturally de ﬁned by its features and the
related nodes. The target of GNN is to learn a state embedding hv 2 Rs
which contains the information of the neighborhood and itself for each
node. The state embedding hv is an s-dimension vector of node v and can
be used to produce an output ov such as the distribution of the predicted
node label. Then the computation steps of hv and ov are deﬁned as:
hv ¼ f
/C0
xv; xco½v/C138; hN v ; xN v
/C1
;
ov ¼ gðhv; xvÞ; (19)
where xv; xco½v/C138; hN v ; xN v are the features of v, the features of its edges, the
states and the features of the nodes in the neighborhood of v, respec-
tively. f here is a parametric function called the local transition function. It
is shared among all nodes and updates the node state according to the
input neighborhood. g is the local output function that describes how the
output is produced. Note that both f and g can be interpreted as the
feedforward neural networks.
Let H, O, X, and XN be the matrices constructed by stacking all the
states, all the outputs, all the features, and all the node features,
respectively. Then we have a compact form as:
H ¼ FðH; XÞ;
O ¼ GðH; XN Þ; (20)
where F, the global transition function, and G, the global output function are
stacked versions of f and g for all nodes in a graph, respectively. The value
of H is the ﬁxed point of Eq. (20) and is uniquely de ﬁned with the
assumption that F is a contraction map.
With the suggestion of Banach ’s ﬁxed point theorem ( Khamsi and
Kirk, 2011), GNN uses the following classic iterative scheme to compute
the state:
Htþ 1 ¼ FðHt; XÞ; (21)
where Ht denotes the t-th iteration of H. The dynamical system Eq. (21)
converges exponentially fast to the solution for any initial value.
Though experimental results have shown that GNN is a powerful
architecture for modeling structural data, there are still several
limitations:
/C15GNN requires f to be a contraction map which limits the model ’s
ability. And it is inef ﬁcient to update the hidden states of nodes
iteratively towards the ﬁxed point.
/C15It is unsuitable to use the ﬁxed points if we focus on the representa-
tion of nodes instead of graphs because the distribution of represen-
tation in the ﬁxed point will be much smoother in value and less
informative for distinguishing each node.
GraphESN. Graph echo state network (GraphESN) ( Gallicchio and
Micheli, 2010) generalizes the echo state network (ESN) ( Jaeger, 2001)
on graphs. It uses a ﬁxed contractive encoding function, and only trains a
readout function. The convergence is ensured by the contractivity of
reservoir dynamics. As a consequence, GraphESN is more ef ﬁcient than
GNN.
SSE. Stochastic Steady-state Embedding (SSE) ( Dai et al., 2018a ) is
also proposed to improve the ef ﬁciency of GNN . SSE proposes a learning
framework which contains two steps. Embeddings of each node are
updated by a parameterized operator in the update step and these em-
beddings are projected to the steady state constraint space to meet the
steady-state conditions.
LP-GNN. Lagrangian Propagation GNN (LP-GNN) ( Tiezzi et al., 2020 )
formalizes the learning task as a constraint optimization problem in the
Lagrangian framework and avoids the iterative computations for the
ﬁxed point. The convergence procedure is implicitly expressed by a
constraint satisfaction mechanism.
3.2.2. Gate-based methods
There are several works attempting to use the gate mechanism like
GRU (Cho et al., 2014 ) or LSTM ( Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997 ) in
the propagation step to diminish the computational limitations in GNN
and improve the long-term propagation of information across the graph
structure. They run a ﬁxed number of training steps without the guar-
antee of convergence.
GGNN. The gated graph neural network (GGNN) ( Li et al., 2016 ) is
proposed to release the limitations of GNN . It releases the requirement of
function f to be a contraction map and uses the Gate Recurrent Units
(GRU) in the propagation step. It also uses back-propagation through
time (BPTT) to compute gradients. The computation step of GGNN can be
found in Table 2.
The node v ﬁrst aggregates messages from its neighbors. Then the
GRU-like update functions incorporate information from the other nodes
and from the previous timestep to update each node ’s hidden state. hN v
gathers the neighborhood information of node v, while z and r are the
update and reset gates.
LSTMs are also used in a similar way as GRU through the propagation
process based on a tree or a graph.
Tree LSTM. Tai et al. (2015) propose two extensions on the tree
structure to the basic LSTM architecture: the Child-Sum Tree-LSTM and
Table 2
Different variants of recurrent operators.
Variant Aggregator Updater
GGNN ht
N v ¼ P
k2N v
ht/C01
k þ bz t
v ¼ σðWz ht
N v þ Uz ht/C01
v Þ
rt
v ¼ σðWr ht
N v þ Ur ht/C01
v Þ
~ht
v ¼ tanhðWht
N v þ Uðrt
v /C12ht/C01
v ÞÞ
ht
v ¼ð 1 /C0zt
v Þ/C12ht/C01
v þ zt
v /C12~ht
v
Tree LSTM
(Child sum)
hti
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Ui ht/C01
k
htf
N v k ¼ Uf ht/C01
k
hto
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Uo ht/C01
k
htu
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Uu ht/C01
k
it
v ¼ σðWi xt
v þ hti
N v þ bi Þ
ft
vk ¼ σðWf xt
v þ htf
N v k þ bf Þ
ot
v ¼ σðWo xt
v þ hto
N v þ bo Þ
ut
v ¼ tanhðWu xt
v þ htu
N v þ bu Þ
ct
v ¼ it
v /C12ut
v þ P
k2N v
ft
vk /C12ct/C01
k
ht
v ¼ ot
v /C12tanhðct
v Þ
Tree LSTM (N-ary) hti
N v ¼ PK
l¼1
Ui
l ht/C01
vl
htf
N v k ¼ PK
l¼1
Uf
kl ht/C01
vl
hto
N v ¼ PK
l¼1
Uo
l ht/C01
vl
htu
N v ¼ PK
l¼1
Uu
l ht/C01
vl
Graph LSTM in
(Peng et al., 2017 )
hti
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Ui
mðv;kÞ ht/C01
k
htf
N v k ¼ Uf
mðv;kÞ ht/C01
k
hto
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Uo
mðv;kÞ ht/C01
k
htu
N v ¼ P
k2N v
Uu
mðv;kÞ ht/C01
k
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
64
the N-ary Tree-LSTM . They are also extensions to the recursive neural
network based models as we mentioned before. Tree is a special case of
graph and each node in Tree-LSTM aggregates information from its
children. Instead of a single forget gate in traditional LSTM, the
Tree-LSTM unit for node v contains one forget gate fvk for each child k.
The computation step of the Child-Sum Tree-LSTM is displayed in
Table 2 . it
v, ot
v, and ct
v are the input gate, output gate and memory cell
respectively. xt
v is the input vector at time t. The N-ary Tree-LSTM is
further designed for a special kind of tree where each node has at most K
children and the children are ordered. The equations for computing hti
N v ;
htf
N v k; hto
N v ; htu
N v in Table 2 introduce separate parameters for each child k.
These parameters allow the model to learn more ﬁne-grained represen-
tations conditioning on the states of a unit ’s children than the Child-Sum
Tree-LSTM.
Graph LSTM. The two types of Tree-LSTMs can be easily adapted to
the graph. The graph-structured LSTM in ( Zayats and Ostendorf, 2018) is
an example of the N-ary Tree-LSTM applied to the graph. However, it is a
simpliﬁed version since each node in the graph has at most 2 incoming
edges (from its parent and sibling predecessor). Peng et al. (2017) pro-
pose another variant of the Graph LSTM based on the relation extraction
task. The edges of graphs in (Peng et al., 2017) have various labels so that
Peng et al. (2017) utilize different weight matrices to represent different
labels. In Table 2, mðv; kÞ denotes the edge label between node v and k.
Liang et al. (2016) propose a Graph LSTM network to address the
semantic object parsing task. It uses the con ﬁdence-driven scheme to
adaptively select the starting node and determine the node updating
sequence. It follows the same idea of generalizing the existing LSTMs into
the graph-structured data but has a speci ﬁc updating sequence while
methods mentioned above are agnostic to the order of nodes.
S-LSTM. Zhang et al. (2018d) propose Sentence LSTM (S-LSTM) for
improving text encoding. It converts text into a graph and utilizes the
Graph LSTM to learn the representation. The S-LSTM shows strong rep-
resentation power in many NLP problems.
3.3. Propagation modules - skip connection
Many applications unroll or stack the graph neural network layer
aiming to achieve better results as more layers (i.e k layers) make each
node aggregate more information from neighbors k hops away. However,
it has been observed in many experiments that deeper models could not
improve the performance and deeper models could even perform worse.
This is mainly because more layers could also propagate the noisy in-
formation from an exponentially increasing number of expanded neigh-
borhood members. It also causes the over smoothing problem because
nodes tend to have similar representations after the aggregation opera-
tion when models go deeper. So that many methods try to add “skip
connections” to make GNN models deeper. In this subsection we intro-
duce three kinds of instantiations of skip connections.
Highway GCN. Rahimi et al. (2018) propose a Highway GCN which
uses layer-wise gates similar to highway networks (Zilly et al., 2016). The
output of a layer is summed with its input with gating weights:
TðhtÞ¼ σðWtht þ btÞ;
htþ 1 ¼ htþ 1 /C12TðhtÞþ ht /C12ð1 /C0TðhtÞÞ : (22)
By adding the highway gates, the performance peaks at 4 layers in a
speciﬁc problem discussed in ( Rahimi et al., 2018 ). The column network
(CLN) ( Pham et al., 2017 ) also utilizes the highway network. But it has
different functions to compute the gating weights.
JKN. Xu et al. (2018) study properties and limitations of neighbor-
hood aggregation schemes. They propose the jump knowledge network
(JKN) which could learn adaptive and structure-aware representations.
JKN selects from all of the intermediate representations (which “jump” to
the last layer) for each node at the last layer, which makes the model
adapt the effective neighborhood size for each node as needed. Xu et al.
(2018) use three approaches of concatenation, max-pooling and
LSTM-attention in the experiments to aggregate information. The JKN
performs well on the experiments in social, bioinformatics and citation
networks. It can also be combined with models like GCN, GraphSAGE and
GAT to improve their performance.
DeepGCNs. Li et al. (2019a) borrow ideas from ResNet ( He et al.,
2016a, 2016b) and DenseNet ( Huang et al., 2017 ). ResGCN and Den-
seGCN are proposed by incorporating residual connections and dense
connections to solve the problems of vanishing gradient and over
smoothing. In detail, the hidden state of a node in ResGCN and Den-
seGCN can be computed as:
htþ 1
Res ¼ htþ 1 þ ht;
htþ 1
Dense ¼k tþ 1
i¼0 hi:
(23)
The experiments of DeepGCNs are conducted on the point cloud se-
mantic segmentation task and the best results are achieved with a 56-
layer model.
3.4. Sampling modules
GNN models aggregate messages for each node from its neighborhood
in the previous layer. Intuitively, if we track back multiple GNN layers,
the size of supporting neighbors will grow exponentially with the depth.
To alleviate this “neighbor explosion” issue, an ef ﬁcient and ef ﬁcacious
way is sampling. Besides, when we deal with large graphs, we cannot
always store and process all neighborhood information for each node,
thus the sampling module is needed to conduct the propagation. In this
section, we introduce three kinds of graph sampling modules: node
sampling, layer sampling, and subgraph sampling.
3.4.1. Node sampling
A straightforward way to reduce the size of neighboring nodes would be
selecting a subset from each node’s neighborhood. GraphSAGE (Hamilton
et al., 2017a) samples aﬁxed small number of neighbors, ensuring a 2 to 50
neighborhood size for each node. To reduce sampling variance,Chen et al.
(2018a) introduce a control-variate based stochastic approximation algo-
rithm for GCN by utilizing the historical activations of nodes as a control
variate. This method limits the receptive ﬁeld in the 1-hop neighborhood,
and uses the historical hidden state as an affordable approximation.
PinSage ( Ying et al., 2018a ) proposes importance-based sampling
method. By simulating random walks starting from target nodes, this
approach chooses the top T nodes with the highest normalized visit
counts.
3.4.2. Layer sampling
Instead of sampling neighbors for each node, layer sampling retains a
small set of nodes for aggregation in each layer to control the expansion
factor. FastGCN ( Chen et al., 2018b ) directly samples the receptive ﬁeld
for each layer. It uses importance sampling, where the important nodes
are more likely to be sampled.
In contrast to ﬁxed sampling methods above, Huang et al. (2018)
introduce a parameterized and trainable sampler to perform layer-wise
sampling conditioned on the former layer. Furthermore, this adaptive
sampler could optimize the sampling importance and reduce variance
simultaneously. LADIES (Zou et al., 2019) intends to alleviate the sparsity
issue in layer-wise sampling by generating samples from the union of
neighbors of the nodes.
3.4.3. Subgraph sampling
Rather than sampling nodes and edges which builds upon the full
graph, a fundamentally different way is to sample multiple subgraphs
and restrict the neighborhood search within these subgraphs. Clus-
terGCN ( Chiang et al., 2019 ) samples subgraphs by graph clustering al-
gorithms, while GraphSAINT ( Zeng et al., 2020 ) directly samples nodes
or edges to generate a subgraph.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
65
3.5. Pooling modules
In the area of computer vision, a convolutional layer is usually followed
by a pooling layer to get more general features. Complicated and large-scale
graphs usually carry rich hierarchical structures which are of great impor-
tance for node-level and graph-level classi ﬁcation tasks. Similar to these
pooling layers, a lot of work focuses on designing hierarchical pooling layers
on graphs. In this section, we introduce two kinds of pooling modules: direct
pooling modules and hierarchical pooling modules.
3.5.1. Direct pooling modules
Direct pooling modules learn graph-level representations directly
from nodes with different node selection strategies. These modules are
also called readout functions in some variants.
Simple Node Pooling. Simple node pooling methods are used by several
models. In these models, node-wise max/mean/sum/attention opera-
tions are applied on node features to get a global graph representation.
Set2set. MPNN uses the Set2set method ( Vinyals et al., 2015a ) as the
readout function to get graph representations. Set2set is designed to deal
with the unordered set T ¼ fðhT
v ; xvÞg and uses a LSTM-based method to
produce an order invariant representation after a predi ﬁned number of
steps.
SortPooling. SortPooling ( Zhang et al., 2018e ) ﬁrst sorts the node
embeddings according to the structural roles of the nodes and then the
sorted embeddings are fed into CNNs to get the representation.
3.5.2. Hierarchical pooling modules
The methods mentioned before directly learn graph representations
from nodes and they do not investigate the hierarchical property of the
graph structure. Next we will talk about methods that follow a hierar-
chical pooling pattern and learn graph representations by layers.
Graph Coarsening. Early methods are usually based on graph
coarsening algorithms. Spectral clustering algorithms are ﬁrstly used but
they are inef ﬁcient because of the eigendecomposition step. Graclus
(Dhillon et al., 2007 ) provides a faster way to cluster nodes and it is
applied as a pooling module. For example, ChebNet and MoNet use
Graclus to merge node pairs and further add additional nodes to make
sure the pooling procedure forms a balanced binary tree.
ECC. Edge-Conditioned Convolution (ECC) ( Simonovsky and Komo-
dakis, 2017) designs its pooling module with recursively downsampling
operation. The downsampling method is based on splitting the graph into
two components by the sign of the largest eigenvector of the Laplacian.
DiffPool. DiffPool ( Ying et al., 2018b ) uses a learnable hierarchical
clustering module by training an assignment matrix St in each layer:
St ¼ softmax
/C0
GNNt;poolðAt; HtÞ
/C1
;
Atþ 1 ¼ð StÞT AtSt; (24)
where Ht is the node feature matrix and At is coarsened adjacency matrix
of layer t. St denotes the probabilities that a node in layer t can be
assigned to a coarser node in layer t þ 1.
gPool. gPool ( Gao and Ji, 2019 ) uses a project vector to learn pro-
jection scores for each node and select nodes with top-k scores.
Compared to DiffPool, it uses a vector instead of a matrix at each layer,
thus it reduces the storage complexity. But the projection procedure does
not consider the graph structure.
EigenPooling. EigenPooling ( Ma et al., 2019a ) is designed to use the
node features and local structure jointly. It uses the local graph Fourier
transform to extract subgraph information and suffers from the in-
efﬁciency of graph eigendecomposition.
SAGPool. SAGPool (Lee et al., 2019 ) is also proposed to use features
and topology jointly to learn graph representations. It uses a
self-attention based method with a reasonable time and space
complexity.
Fig. 4. An overview of variants considering graph type and scale.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
66
4. Variants considering graph type and scale
In the above sections, we assume the graph to be the simplest format.
However, many graphs in the real world are complex. In this subsection,
we will introduce the approaches which attempt to address the chal-
lenges of complex graph types. An overview of these variants is shown in
Fig. 4.
4.1. Directed graphs
The ﬁrst type is the directed graphs. Directed edges usually contain
more information than undirected edges. For example, in a knowledge
graph where a head entity is the parent class of a tail entity, the edge
direction offers information about the partial order. Instead of simply
adopting an asymmetric adjacency matrix in the convolution operator,
we can model the forward and reverse directions of an edge differently.
DGP ( Kampffmeyer et al., 2019 ) uses two kinds of weight matrices Wp
and Wc for the convolution in forward and reverse directions.
4.2. Heterogeneous graphs
The second variant of graphs is heterogeneous graphs, where the
nodes and edges are multi-typed or multi-modal. More speci ﬁcally, in a
heterogeneous graph fV; E; φ; ψg, each node vi is associated with a type
φðviÞ and each edge ej with a type ψðejÞ.
4.2.1. Meta-path-based methods
Most approaches toward this graph type utilize the concept of meta-
path. Meta-path is a path scheme which determines the type of node in
each position of the path, e.g. φ1→
ψ1
φ2→
ψ2
φ3⋯→
ψL
φLþ 1, where L is the length
of the meta-path. In the training process, the meta-paths are instantiated
as node sequences. By connecting the two end nodes of a meta-path in-
stances, the meta-path captures the similarity of two nodes which may
not be directly connected. Consequently, one heterogeneous graph can
be reduced to several homogeneous graphs, on which graph learning
algorithms can be applied. In early work, meta-path based similarity
search is investigated ( Sun et al., 2011 ). Recently, more GNN models
which utilize the meta-path are proposed. HAN ( Wang et al., 2019a) ﬁrst
performs graph attention on the meta-path-based neighbors under each
meta-path and then uses a semantic attention over output embeddings of
nodes under all meta-path schemes to generate the ﬁnal representation of
nodes. MAGNN (Fu et al., 2020 ) proposes to take the intermediate nodes
in a meta-path into consideration. It ﬁrst aggregates the information
along the meta-path using a neural module and then performs attention
over different meta-path instances associated with a node and ﬁnally
performs attention over different meta-path schemes. GTN ( Yun et al.,
2019) proposes a novel graph transformer layer which identi ﬁes new
connections between unconnected nodes while learning representations
of nodes. The learned new connections can connect nodes which are
serveral hops away from each other but are closely related, which
function as the meta-paths.
4.2.2. Edge-based methods
There are also works which don ’t utilize meta-paths. These works
typically use different functions in terms of sampling, aggregation, etc.
for different kinds of neighbors and edges. HetGNN ( Zhang et al., 2019b)
addresses the challenge by directly treating neighbors of different types
differently in sampling, feature encoding and aggregation steps. HGT (Hu
et al., 2020a) deﬁnes the meta-relation to be the type of two neighboring
nodes and their link 〈φðviÞ; ψðeijÞ; φðvjÞ〉. It assigns different attention
weight matrices to different meta-relations, empowering the model to
take type information into consideration.
4.2.3. Methods for relational graphs
The edge of some graphs may contain more information than the type, or
the quantity of types may be too large, exerting difﬁculties to applying the
meta-path or meta-relation based methods. We refer to this kind of graphs as
relational graphs ( Schlichtkrull et al., 2018 ), To handle the relational
graphs, G2S ( Beck et al., 2018 ) converts the original graph to a bipartite
graph where the original edges also become nodes and one original edge is
split into two new edges which means there are two new edges between the
edge node and begin/end nodes. After this transformation, it uses a Gated
Graph Neural Network followed by a Recurrent Neural Network to convert
graphs with edge information into sentences. The aggregation function of
GGNN takes both the hidden representations of nodes and the relations as
the input. As another approach, R-GCN (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018) doesn’t
require to convert the original graph format. It assigns different weight
matrices for the propagation on different kinds of edges. However, When
the number of relations is very large, the number of parameters in the model
explodes. Therefore, it introduces two kinds of regularizations to reduce the
number of parameters for modeling amounts of relations: basis- and
block-diagonal-decomposition. With the basis decomposition, each Wr is
deﬁned as follows:
Wr ¼
XB
b¼1
arbVb: (25)
Here each Wr is a linear combination of basis transformations Vb 2
Rdin /C2dout with coef ﬁcients arb. In the block-diagonal decomposition, R-
GCN de ﬁnes each Wr through the direct sum over a set of low-
dimensional matrices, which need more parameters than the ﬁrst one.
4.2.4. Methods for multiplex graphs
In more complex scenarios, a pair of nodes in a graph can be associ-
ated with multiple edges of different types. By viewing under different
types of edges, the graph can form multiple layers, in which each layer
represents one type of relation. Therefore, multiplex graph can also be
referred to as multi-view graph (multi-dimensional graph). For example,
in YouTube, there can be three different relations between two users:
sharing, subscription, comment. Edge types are not assumed independent
with each other, therefore simply splitting the graph into subgraphs with
one type of edges might not be an optimal solution. mGCN ( Ma et al.,
2019b) introduces general representations and dimension-speci ﬁc rep-
resentations for nodes in each layer of GNN. The dimension-speci ﬁc
representations are projected from general representations using
Fig. 5. An overview of methods with unsupervised loss.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
67
different projection matrices and then aggregated to form the next layer’s
general representations.
4.3. Dynamic graphs
Another variant of graphs is dynamic graphs, in which the graph
structure, e.g. the existence of edges and nodes, keeps changing over
time. To model the graph structured data together with the time series
data, DCRNN ( Li et al., 2018b ) and STGCN ( Yu et al., 2018 ) ﬁrst collect
spatial information by GNNs, then feed the outputs into a sequence
model like sequence-to-sequence models or RNNs. Differently,
Structural-RNN (Jain et al., 2016 ) and ST-GCN ( Yan et al., 2018 ) collect
spatial and temporal messages at the same time. They extend static graph
structure with temporal connections so they can apply traditional GNNs
on the extended graphs. Similarly, DGNN ( Manessi et al., 2020) feeds the
output embeddings of each node from the GCN into separate LSTMs. The
weights of LSTMs are shared between each node. On the other hand,
EvolveGCN (Pareja et al., 2020 ) argues that directly modeling dynamics
of the node representation will hamper the model ’s performance on
graphs where node set keeps changing. Therefore, instead of treating
node features as the input to RNN, it feeds the weights of the GCN into
the RNN to capture the intrinsic dynamics of the graph interactions.
Recently, a survey ( Huang et al., 2020 ) classi ﬁes the dynamic networks
into several categories based on the link duration, and groups the existing
models into these categories according to their specialization. It also
establishes a general framework for models of dynamic graphs and ﬁts
existing models into the general framework.
4.4. Other graph types
For other variants of graphs, such as hypergraphs and signed graphs,
there are also some models proposed to address the challenges.
4.4.1. Hypergraphs
A hypergraph can be denoted by G ¼ð V;E;WeÞ, where an edge e 2 E
connects two or more vertices and is assigned a weight w 2 We. The
adjacency matrix of a hypergraph can be represented in a jVj/C2 jEj matrix
L:
Lv;e ¼
/C26
1; if v 2 e
0; if v 62 e
/C27
: (26)
HGNN ( Feng et al., 2019 ) proposes hypergraph convolution to pro-
cess these high order interaction between nodes:
H ¼ D/C01
2
v LWeD/C01
e LT D/C01
2
v XW; (27)
where the Dv; We; De; X are the node degree matrix, edge weight matrix,
edge degree matrix and node feature matrix respectively. W is the
learnable parameters. This formula is derived by approximating the
hypergraph Laplacian using truncated Chebyshev polynomials.
4.4.2. Signed graphs
Signed graphs are the graphs with signed edges, i.e. an edge can be
either positive or negative. Instead of simply treating the negative edges
as the absent edges or another type of edges, SGCN ( Derr et al., 2018 )
utilizes balance theory to capture the interactions between positive edges
and negative edges. Intuitively, balance theory suggests that the friend
(positive edge) of my friend is also my friend and the enemy (negative
edge) of my enemy is my friend. Therefore it provides theoretical foun-
dation for SGCN to model the interactions between positive edges and
negative edges.
4.5. Large graphs
As we mentioned in Section 3.4, sampling operators are usually used
to process large-scale graphs. Besides sampling techniques, there are also
other methods for the scaling problem. Leveraging approximate
personalized PageRank, methods proposed by Klicpera et al. (2019) and
Bojchevski et al. (2020) avoid calculating high-order propagation
matrices. Rossi et al. (2020) propose a method to precompute graph
convolutional ﬁlters of different sizes for ef ﬁcient training and inference.
PageRank-based models squeeze multiple GCN layers into one single
propagation layer to mitigate the “neighbor explosion ” issue, hence are
highly scalable and ef ﬁcient.
5. Variants for different training settings
In this section, we introduce variants for different training settings.
For supervised and semi-supervised settings, labels are provided so that
loss functions are easy to design for these labeled samples. For unsu-
pervised settings, there are no labeled samples so that loss functions
should depend on the information provided by the graph itself, such as
input features or the graph topology. In this section, we mainly introduce
variants for unsupervised training, which are usually based on the ideas
of auto-encoders or contrastive learning. An overview of the methods we
mention is shown in Fig. 5.
5.1. Graph auto-encoders
For unsupervised graph representation learning, there has been a
trend to extend auto-encoder (AE) to graph domains.
Graph Auto-Encoder (GAE) ( Kipf and Welling, 2016 ) ﬁrst uses GCNs
to encode nodes in the graph. Then it uses a simple decoder to reconstruct
the adjacency matrix and compute the loss from the similarity between
the original adjacency matrix and the reconstructed matrix:
H ¼ GCNðX; AÞ;
~A ¼ ρðHHT Þ: (28)
Kipf and Welling (2016) also train the GAE model in a variational
manner and the model is named as the variational graph auto-encoder
(VGAE).
Adversarially Regularized Graph Auto-encoder (ARGA) ( Pan et al.,
2018) employs generative adversarial networks (GANs) to regularize a
GCN-based graph auto-encoder, which could learn more robust node
representations.
Instead of recovering the adjacency matrix, Wang et al. (2017) , Park
et al. (2019) try to reconstruct the feature matrix. MGAE ( Wang et al.,
2017) utilizes marginalized denoising auto-encoder to get robust node
representation. To build a symmetric graph auto-encoder, GALA ( Park
et al., 2019 ) proposes Laplacian sharpening, the inverse operation of
Laplacian smoothing, to decode hidden states. This mechanism alleviates
the oversmoothing issue in GNN training.
Different from above, AGE (Cui et al., 2020) states that the recovering
losses are not compatible with downstream tasks. Therefore, they apply
adaptive learning for the measurement of pairwise node similarity and
achieve state-of-the-art performance on node clustering and link
prediction.
5.2. Contrastive learning
Besides graph auto-encoders, contrastive learning paves another way
for unsupervised graph representation learning. Deep Graph Infomax
(DGI) ( Velickovic et al., 2019 ) maximizes mutual information between
node representations and graph representations. Infograph ( Sun et al.,
2020) aims to learn graph representations by mutual information maxi-
mization between graph-level representations and the substructure-level
representations of different scales including nodes, edges and triangles.
Multi-view ( Hassani and Khasahmadi, 2020 ) contrasts representations
from ﬁrst-order adjacency matrix and graph diffusion, achieves
state-of-the-art performances on multiple graph learning tasks.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
68
6. A design example of GNN
In this section, we give an existing GNN model to illustrated the
design process. Taking the task of heterogeneous graph pretraining as an
example, we use GPT-GNN ( Hu et al., 2020b ) as the model to illustrate
the design process.
1. Find graph structure. The paper focuses on applications on the aca-
demic knowledge graph and the recommendation system. In the ac-
ademic knowledge graph, the graph structure is explicit. In
recommendation systems, users, items and reviews can be regarded as
nodes and the interactions among them can be regarded as edges, so
the graph structure is also easy to construct.
2. Specify graph type and scale. The tasks focus on heterogeneous graphs,
so that types of nodes and edges should be considered and incorpo-
rated in the ﬁnal model. As the academic graph and the recommen-
dation graph contain millions of nodes, so that the model should
further consider the ef ﬁciency problem. In conclusion, the model
should focus on large-scale heterogeneous graphs.
3. Design loss function. As downstream tasks in ( Hu et al., 2020b ) are all
node-level tasks (e.g. Paper-Field prediction in the academic graph),
so that the model should learn node representations in the pretraining
step. In the pretraining step, no labeled data is available, so that a
self-supervised graph generation task is designed to learn node em-
beddings. In the ﬁnetuning step, the model is ﬁnetuned based on the
training data of each task, so that the supervised loss of each task is
applied.
4. Build model using computational modules. Finally the model is built
with computational modules. For the propagation module, the au-
thors use a convolution operator HGT ( Hu et al., 2020a ) that we
mentioned before. HGT incorporates the types of nodes and edges
into the propagation step of the model and the skip connection is also
added in the architecture. For the sampling module, a specially
designed sampling method HGSampling ( Hu et al., 2020a ) is applied,
which is a heterogeneous version of LADIES ( Zou et al., 2019 ). As the
model focuses on learning node representations, the pooling module
is not needed. The HGT layer are stacked multiple layers to learn
better node embeddings.
7. Analyses of GNNs
7.1. Theoretical aspect
In this section, we summarize the papers about the theoretic foun-
dations and explanations of graph neural networks from various
perspectives.
Fig. 6. Application scenarios. (Icons made by Freepik from Flaticon)
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
69
7.1.1. Graph signal processing
From the spectral perspective of view, GCNs perform convolution
operation on the input features in the spectral domain, which follows
graph signal processing in theory.
There exists several works analyzing GNNs from graph signal pro-
cessing. Li et al. (2018c) ﬁrst address the graph convolution in graph
neural networks is actually Laplacian smoothing, which smooths the
feature matrix so that nearby nodes have similar hidden representations.
Laplacian smoothing re ﬂects the homophily assumption that nearby
nodes are supposed to be similar. The Laplacian matrix serves as a
low-pass ﬁlter for the input features. SGC ( Wu et al., 2019b ) further
removes the weight matrices and nonlinearties between layers, showing
that the low-pass ﬁlter is the reason why GNNs work.
Following the idea of low-pass ﬁltering, Zhang et al. (2019c), Cui et al.
(2020), NT and Maehara ( Nt and Maehara, 2019 ), Chen et al. (2020b)
analyze different ﬁlters and provide new insights. To achieve low-pass
ﬁltering for all the eigenvalues, AGC ( Zhang et al., 2019c ) designs a
graph ﬁlter I /C01
2 L according to the frequency response function. AGE (Cui
et al., 2020) further demonstrates that ﬁlter with I /C01
λmax
L could get better
results, where λmax is the maximum eigenvalue of the Laplacian matrix.
Despite linearﬁlters, GraphHeat (Xu et al., 2019a) leverages heat kernels for
better low-pass properties. NT and Maehara (Nt and Maehara, 2019) state
that graph convolution is mainly a denoising process for input features, the
model performances heavily depend on the amount of noises in the feature
matrix. To alleviate the over-smoothing issue, Chen et al. (2020b) present
two metrics for measuring the smoothness of node representations and the
over-smoothness of GNN models. The authors conclude that the
information-to-noise ratio is the key factor for over-smoothing.
7.1.2. Generalization
The generalization ability of GNNs have also received attentions
recently. Scarselli et al. (2018) prove the VC-dimensions for a limited
class of GNNs. Garg et al. (2020) further give much tighter generalization
bounds based on Rademacher bounds for neural networks.
Verma and Zhang (2019) analyze the stability and generalization
properties of single-layer GNNs with different convolutional ﬁlters. The
authors conclude that the stability of GNNs depends on the largest
eigenvalue of the ﬁlters. Knyazev et al. (2019) focus on the generalization
ability of attention mechanism in GNNs. Their conclusion shows that
attention helps GNNs generalize to larger and noisy graphs.
7.1.3. Expressivity
On the expressivity of GNNs, Xu et al. (2019b) , Morris et al. (2019)
show that GCNs and GraphSAGE are less discriminative than
Table 3
Applications of graph neural networks.
Area Application References
Graph Mining Graph Matching ( Riba et al., 2018 ; Li et al., 2019b )
Graph Clustering ( Zhang et al., 2019c ; Ying et al., 2018b ; Tsitsulin et al., 2020 )
Physics Physical Systems Modeling ( Battaglia et al., 2016 ; Sukhbaatar Ferguset al., 2016 ; Watters et al., 2017 ; Hoshen, 2017; Kipf et al., 2018 ; Sanchez et al.,
2018)
Chemistry Molecular Fingerprints ( Duvenaud et al., 2015 ; Kearnes et al., 2016 )
Chemical Reaction
Prediction
Do et al. (2019)
Biology Protein Interface Prediction Fout et al. (2017)
Side Effects Prediction Zitnik et al. (2018)
Disease Classi ﬁcation Rhee et al. (2018)
Knowledge Graph KB Completion ( Hamaguchi et al., 2017 ; Schlichtkrull et al., 2018 ; Shang et al., 2019 )
KG Alignment ( Wang et al., 2018b ; Zhang et al., 2019d ; Xu et al., 2019c )
Generation Graph Generation ( Shchur et al., 2018b ; Nowak et al., 2018 ; Ma et al., 2018 ; You et al., 2018a , 2018b; De Cao and Kipf, 2018 ; Li et al.,
2018d; Shi et al., 2020 ; Liu et al., 2019 ; Grover et al., 2019 )
Combinatorial
Optimization
Combinatorial Optimization ( Khalil et al., 2017 ; Nowak et al., 2018 ; Li et al., 2018e ; Kool et al., 2019 ; Bello et al., 2017 ; Vinyals et al., 2015b ; Sutton
and Barto, 2018 ; Dai et al., 2016 ; Gasse et al., 2019 ; Zheng et al., 2020a ; Selsam et al., 2019 ; Sato et al., 2019 )
Trafﬁc Network Traf ﬁc State Prediction ( Cui et al., 2018b ; Yu et al., 2018 ; Zheng et al., 2020b ; Guo et al., 2019 )
Recommendation
Systems
User-item Interaction
Prediction
(van den Berg et al., 2017 ; Ying et al., 2018a )
Social Recommendation ( Wu et al., 2019c ; Fan et al., 2019 )
Others (Structural) Stock Market ( Matsunaga et al., 2019 ; Yang et al., 2019 ; Chen et al., 2018c ; Li et al., 2020 ; Kim et al., 2019 )
Software De ﬁned Networks Rusek et al. (2019)
AMR Graph to Text ( Song et al., 2018a ; Beck et al., 2018 )
Text Text Classi ﬁcation ( Peng et al., 2018 ; Yao et al., 2019 ; Zhang et al., 2018d ; Tai et al., 2015 )
Sequence Labeling ( Zhang et al., 2018d ; Marcheggiani and Titov, 2017 )
Neural Machine Translation ( Bastings et al., 2017 ; Marcheggiani et al., 2018 ; Beck et al., 2018 )
Relation Extraction ( Miwa and Bansal, 2016 ; Peng et al., 2017 ; Song et al., 2018b ; Zhang et al., 2018f )
Event Extraction ( Nguyen and Grishman, 2018 ; Liu et al., 2018 )
Fact Veri ﬁcation ( Zhou et al., 2019 ; Liu et al., 2020 ; Zhong et al., 2020 )
Question Answering ( Song et al., 2018c ; De Cao et al., 2019 ; Qiu et al., 2019 ; Tu et al., 2019 ; Ding et al., 2019 )
Relational Reasoning ( Santoro et al., 2017 ; Palm et al., 2018 ; Battaglia et al., 2016 )
Image Social Relationship
Understanding
Wang et al. (2018c)
Image Classi ﬁcation ( Garcia and Bruna, 2018 ; Wang et al., 2018d ; Lee et al., 2018b ; Kampffmeyer et al., 2019 ; Marino et al., 2017 )
Visual Question Answering ( Teney et al., 2017 ; Wang et al., 2018c ; Narasimhan et al., 2018 )
Object Detection ( Hu et al., 2018 ; Gu et al., 2018 )
Interaction Detection ( Qi et al., 2018 ; Jain et al., 2016 )
Region Classi ﬁcation Chen et al. (2018d)
Semantic Segmentation ( Liang et al., 2016 , 2017; Landrieu and Simonovsky, 2018 ; Wang et al., 2018e ; Qi et al., 2017b )
Other (Non-structural) Program Veri ﬁcation ( Allamanis et al., 2018 ; Li et al., 2016 )
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
70
Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test, an algorithm for graph isomorphism testing.
Xu et al. (2019a) also propose GINs for more expressive GNNs. Going
beyond WL test, Barcel/C19o et al. (2019) discuss if GNNs are expressible for
FOC2, a fragment of ﬁrst order logic. The authors ﬁnd that existing GNNs
can hardly ﬁt the logic. For learning graph topologic structures, Garg
et al. (2020) prove that locally dependent GNN variants are not capable
to learn global graph properties, including diameters, biggest/smallest
cycles, or motifs.
Loukas (2020) and Dehmamy et al. (2019) argue that existing works
only consider the expressivity when GNNs have in ﬁnite layers and units.
Their work investigates the representation power of GNNs with ﬁnite
depth and width. Oono and Suzuki (2020) discuss the asymptotic be-
haviors of GNNs as the model deepens and model them as dynamic
systems.
7.1.4. Invariance
As there are no node orders in graphs, the output embeddings of
GNNs are supposed to be permutation-invariant or equivariant to the
input features. Maron et al. (2019a) characterize permutation-invariant
or equivariant linear layers to build invariant GNNs. Maron et al.
(2019b) further prove the result that the universal invariant GNNs can be
obtained with higher-order tensorization. Keriven and Peyr /C19e (2019)
provide an alternative proof and extend this conclusion to the equivariant
case. Chen et al. (2019) build connections between
permutation-invariance and graph isomorphism testing. To prove their
equivalence, Chen et al. (2019) leverage sigma-algebra to describe the
expressivity of GNNs.
7.1.5. Transferability
A deterministic characteristic of GNNs is that the parameterization is
untied with graphs, which suggests the ability to transfer across graphs
(so-called transferability) with performance guarantees. Levie et al.
(2019) investigate the transferability of spectral graph ﬁlters, showing
that such ﬁlters are able to transfer on graphs in the same domain. Ruiz
et al. (2020) analyze GNN behaviour on graphons. Graphon refers to the
limit of a sequence of graphs, which can also be seen as a generator for
dense graphs. The authors conclude that GNNs are transferable across
graphs obtained deterministically from the same graphon with different
sizes.
7.1.6. Label ef ﬁciency
(Semi-) Supervised learning for GNNs needs a considerable amount of
labeled data to achieve a satisfying performance. Improving the label
efﬁciency has been studied in the perspective of active learning, in which
informative nodes are actively selected to be labeled by an oracle to train
the GNNs. Cai et al. (2017) , Gao et al. (2018b) , Hu et al. (2020c)
demonstrate that by selecting the informative nodes such as the
high-degree nodes and uncertain nodes, the labeling ef ﬁciency can be
dramatically improved.
7.2. Empirical aspect
Besides theoretical analysis, empirical studies of GNNs are also
required for better comparison and evaluation. Here we include several
empirical studies for GNN evaluation and benchmarks.
7.2.1. Evaluation
Evaluating machine learning models is an essential step in research.
Concerns about experimental reproducibility and replicability have been
raised over the years. Whether and to what extent do GNN models work?
Which parts of the models contribute to the ﬁnal performance? To
investigate such fundamental questions, studies about fair evaluation
strategies are urgently needed.
On semi-supervised node classi ﬁcation task, Shchur et al. (2018a)
explore how GNN models perform under same training strategies and
hyperparameter tune. Their works concludes that different dataset splits
lead to dramatically different rankings of models. Also, simple models
could outperform complicated ones under proper settings. Errica et al.
(2020) review several graph classiﬁcation models and point out that they
are compared inproperly. Based on rigorous evaluation, structural in-
formation turns up to not be fully exploited for graph classi ﬁcation. You
et al. (2020) discuss the architectural designs of GNN models, such as the
number of layers and the aggregation function. By a huge amount of
experiments, this work provides comprehensive guidelines for GNN
designation over various tasks.
7.2.2. Benchmarks
High-quality and large-scale benchmark datasets such as ImageNet
are signiﬁcant in machine learning research. However in graph learning,
widely-adopted benchmarks are problematic. For example, most node
classiﬁcation datasets contain only 3000 to 20,000 nodes, which are
small compared with real-world graphs. Furthermore, the experimental
protocols across studies are not uni ﬁed, which is hazardous to the liter-
ature. To mitigate this issue, Dwivedi et al. (2020) , Hu et al. (2020d)
provide scalable and reliable benchmarks for graph learning. Dwivedi
et al. (2020) build medium-scale benchmark datasets in multiple do-
mains and tasks, while OGB ( Hu et al., 2020d) offers large-scale datasets.
Furthermore, both works evaluate current GNN models and provide
leaderboards for further comparison.
8. Applications
Graph neural networks have been explored in a wide range of do-
mains across supervised, semi-supervised, unsupervised and reinforce-
ment learning settings. In this section, we generally group the
applications in two scenarios: (1) Structural scenarios where the data has
explicit relational structure. These scenarios, on the one hand, emerge
from scienti ﬁc researches, such as graph mining, modeling physical
systems and chemical systems. On the other hand, they rise from in-
dustrial applications such as knowledge graphs, traf ﬁc networks and
recommendation systems. (2) Non-structural scenarios where the rela-
tional structure is implicit or absent. These scenarios generally include
image (computer vision) and text (natural language processing), which
are two of the most actively developing branches of AI researches. A
simple illustration of these applications is in Fig. 6. Note that we only list
several representative applications instead of providing an exhaustive
list. The summary of the applications could be found in Table 3.
8.1. Structural scenarios
In the following subsections, we will introduce GNNs ’applications in
structural scenarios, where the data are naturally performed in the graph
structure.
8.1.1. Graph mining
The ﬁrst application is to solve the basic tasks in graph mining.
Generally, graph mining algorithms are used to identify useful structures
for downstream tasks. Traditional graph mining challenges include
frequent sub-graph mining, graph matching, graph classi ﬁcation, graph
clustering, etc. Although with deep learning, some downstream tasks can
be directly solved without graph mining as an intermediate step, the
basic challenges are worth being studied in the GNNs ’perspective.
Graph Matching. The ﬁrst challenge is graph matching. Traditional
methods for graph matching usually suffer from high computational
complexity. The emergence of GNNs allows researchers to capture the
structure of graphs using neural networks, thus offering another solution
to the problem. Riba et al. (2018) propose a siamese MPNN model to
learn the graph editing distance. The siamese framework is two parallel
MPNNs with the same structure and weight sharing, The training
objective is to embed a pair of graphs with small editing distance into
close latent space. Li et al. (2019b) design similar methods while ex-
periments on more real-world scenario such as similarity search in
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
71
control ﬂow graph.
Graph Clustering. Graph clustering is to group the vertices of a graph
into clusters based on the graph structure and/or node attributes. Various
works ( Zhang et al., 2019c ) in node representation learning are devel-
oped and the representation of nodes can be passed to traditional clus-
tering algorithms. Apart of learning node embeddings, graph pooling
(Ying et al., 2018b ) can be seen as a kind of clustering. More recently,
Tsitsulin et al. (2020) directly target at the clustering task. They study the
desirable property of a good graph clustering method and propose to
optimize the spectral modularity, which is a remarkably useful graph
clustering metric.
8.1.2. Physics
Modeling real-world physical systems is one of the most fundamental
aspects of understanding human intelligence. A physical system can be
modeled as the objects in the system and pair-wise interactions between
objects. Simulation in the physical system requires the model to learn the
law of the system and make predictions about the next state of the sys-
tem. By modeling the objects as nodes and pair-wise interactions as
edges, the systems can be simpli ﬁed as graphs. For example, in particle
systems, particles can interact with each other via multiple interactions,
including collision ( Hoshen, 2017 ), spring connection, electromagnetic
force ( Kipf et al., 2018 ), etc., where particles are seen as nodes and in-
teractions are seen as edges. Another example is the robotic system,
which is formed by multiple bodies (e.g., arms, legs) connected with
joints. The bodies and joints can be seen as nodes and edges, respectively.
The model needs to infer the next state of the bodies based on the current
state of the system and the principles of physics.
Before the advent of graph neural networks, works process the graph
representation of the systems using the available neural blocks. Interac-
tion Networks ( Battaglia et al., 2016 ) utilizes MLP to encode the inci-
dence matrices of the graph. CommNet ( Sukhbaatar Ferguset al., 2016 )
performs nodes updates using the nodes ’ previous representations and
the average of all nodes ’previous representations. VAIN ( Hoshen, 2017)
further introduces the attention mechanism. VIN ( Watters et al., 2017 )
combines CNNs, RNNs and IN ( Battaglia et al., 2016 ).
The emergence of GNNs let us perform GNN-based reasoning about
objects, relations, and physics in a simpli ﬁed but effective way. NRI ( Kipf
et al., 2018 ) takes the trajectory of objects as input and infers an explicit
interaction graph, and learns a dynamic model simultaneously. The
interaction graphs are learned from former trajectories, and trajectory
predictions are generated from decoding the interaction graphs.
Sanchez et al. (2018) propose a Graph Network-based model to
encode the graph formed by bodies and joints of a robotic system. They
further learn the policy of stably controlling the system by combining
GNs with Reinforcement learning.
8.1.3. Chemistry and biology
Molecular Fingerprints. Molecular ﬁngerprints serve as a way to
encode the structure of molecules. The simplest ﬁngerprint can be a one-
hot vector, where each digit represents the existence or absence of a
particular substructure. These ﬁngerprints can be used in molecule
searching, which is a core step in computer-aided drug design. Conven-
tional molecular ﬁngerprints are hand-made and ﬁxed (e.g., the one-hot
vector). However, molecules can be naturally seen as graphs, with atoms
being the nodes and chemical-bonds being the edges. Therefore, by
applying GNNs to molecular graphs, we can obtain better ﬁngerprints.
Duvenaud et al. (2015) propose neural graph ﬁngerprints (Neural
FPs), which calculate substructure feature vectors via GCNs and sum to
get overall representations. Kearnes et al. (2016) explicitly model atom
and atom pairs independently to emphasize atom interactions. It in-
troduces edge representation et
uv instead of aggregation function, i.e.
ht
N v ¼ P
u2N ðvÞ
et
uv.
Chemical Reaction Prediction. Chemical reaction product predic-
tion is a fundamental issue in organic chemistry. Graph Transformation
Policy Network ( Do et al., 2019 ) encodes the input molecules and gen-
erates an intermediate graph with a node pair prediction network and a
policy network.
Protein Interface Prediction. Proteins interact with each other
using the interface, which is formed by the amino acid residues from each
participating protein. The protein interface prediction task is to deter-
mine whether particular residues constitute part of a protein. Generally,
the prediction for a single residue depends on other neighboring resi-
dues. By letting the residues to be nodes, the proteins can be represented
as graphs, which can leverage the GNN-based machine learning algo-
rithms. Fout et al. (2017) propose a GCN-based method to learn ligand
and receptor protein residue representation and to merge them for
pair-wise classi ﬁcation. MR-GNN ( Xu et al., 2019d ) introduces a
multi-resolution approach to extract and summarize local and global
features for better prediction.
Biomedical Engineering. With Protein-Protein Interaction Network,
Rhee et al. (2018) leverage graph convolution and relation network for
breast cancer subtype classi ﬁcation. Zitnik et al. (2018) also suggest a
GCN-based model for polypharmacy side effects prediction. Their work
models the drug and protein interaction network and separately deals
with edges in different types.
8.1.4. Knowledge graph
The knowledge graph (KG) represents a collection of real-world en-
tities and the relational facts between pairs of the entities. It has wide
application, such as question answering, information retrieval and
knowledge guided generation. Tasks on KGs include learning low-
dimensional embeddings which contain rich semantics for the entities
and relations, predicting the missing links between entities, and multi-
hop reasoning over the knowledge graph. One line of research treats
the graph as a collection of triples, and proposes various kinds of loss
functions to distinguish the correct triples and false triples ( Bordes et al.,
2013). The other line leverages the graph nature of KG, and uses
GNN-based methods for various tasks. When treated as a graph, KG can
be seen as a heterogeneous graph. However, unlike other heterogeneous
graphs such as social networks, the logical relations are of more impor-
tance than the pure graph structure.
R-GCN ( Schlichtkrull et al., 2018 ) is the ﬁrst work to incorporate
GNNs for knowledge graph embedding. To deal with various relations,
R-GCN proposes relation-speci ﬁc transformation in the message passing
steps. Structure-Aware Convolutional Network ( Shang et al., 2019 )
combines a GCN encoder and a CNN decoder together for better
knowledge representations.
A more challenging setting is knowledge base completion for out-of-
knowledge-base (OOKB) entities. The OOKB entities are unseen in the
training set, but directly connect to the observed entities in the training
set. The embeddings of OOKB entities can be aggregated from the
observed entities. Hamaguchi et al. (2017) use GNNs to solve the prob-
lem, which achieve satisfying performance both in the standard KBC
setting and the OOKB setting.
Besides knowledge graph representation learning, Wang et al.
(2018b) utilize GCN to solve the cross-lingual knowledge graph align-
ment problem. The model embeds entities from different languages into a
uniﬁed embedding space and aligns them based on the embedding sim-
ilarity. To align large-scale heterogeneous knowledge graphs, OAG
(Zhang et al., 2019d ) uses graph attention networks to model various
types of entities. With representing entities as their surrounding sub-
graphs, Xu et al. (2019c) transfer the entity alignment problem to a graph
matching problem and then solve it by graph matching networks.
8.1.5. Generative models
Generative models for real-world graphs have drawn signi ﬁcant
attention for their important applications including modeling social in-
teractions, discovering new chemical structures, and constructing
knowledge graphs. As deep learning methods have powerful ability to
learn the implicit distribution of graphs, there is a surge in neural graph
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
72
generative models recently.
NetGAN (Shchur et al., 2018b ) is one of the ﬁrst work to build neural
graph generative model, which generates graphs via random walks. It
transforms the problem of graph generation to the problem of walk
generation which takes the random walks from a speci ﬁc graph as input
and trains a walk generative model using GAN architecture. While the
generated graph preserves important topological properties of the orig-
inal graph, the number of nodes is unable to change in the generating
process, which is as same as the original graph. GraphRNN ( You et al.,
2018b) manages to generate the adjacency matrix of a graph by gener-
ating the adjacency vector of each node step by step, which can output
networks with different numbers of nodes. Li et al. (2018d) propose a
model which generates edges and nodes sequentially and utilizes a graph
neural network to extract the hidden state of the current graph which is
used to decide the action in the next step during the sequential generative
process. GraphAF (Shi et al., 2020 ) also formulates graph generation as a
sequential decision process. It combines the ﬂow-based generation with
the autogressive model. Towards molecule generation, it also conducts
validity check of the generated molecules using existing chemical rules
after each step of generation.
Instead of generating graph sequentially, other works generate the
adjacency matrix of graph at once. MolGAN ( De Cao and Kipf, 2018 )
utilizes a permutation-invariant discriminator to solve the node variant
problem in the adjacency matrix. Besides, it applies a reward network for
RL-based optimization towards desired chemical properties. What ’s
more, Ma et al. (2018) propose constrained variational auto-encoders to
ensure the semantic validity of generated graphs. And, GCPN ( You et al.,
2018a) incorporates domain-speci ﬁc rules through reinforcement
learning. GNF ( Liu et al., 2019 ) adapts normalizing ﬂow to the graph
data. Normalizing ﬂow is a kind of generative model which uses a
invertable mapping to transform observed data into latent vector space.
Transforming from the latent vector back into the observed data using
the inverse matrix serves as the generating process. GNF combines
normalizing ﬂow with a permutation-invariant graph auto-encoder to
take graph structured data as the input and generate new graphs at the
test time. Graphite ( Grover et al., 2019 ) integrates GNN into variational
auto-encoders to encode the graph structure and features into latent
variables. More speci ﬁcally, it uses isotropic Gaussian as the latent var-
iables and then uses iterative re ﬁnement strategy to decode from the
latent variables.
8.1.6. Combinatorial optimization
Combinatorial optimization problems over graphs are set of NP-hard
problems which attract much attention from scientists of all ﬁelds. Some
speciﬁc problems like traveling salesman problem (TSP) and minimum
spanning trees (MST) have got various heuristic solutions. Recently,
using a deep neural network for solving such problems has been a hot-
spot, and some of the solutions further leverage graph neural network
because of their graph structure.
Bello et al. (2017) ﬁrst propose a deep-learning approach to tackle
TSP. Their method consists of two parts: a Pointer Network ( Vinyals
et al., 2015b ) for parameterizing rewards and a policy gradient ( Sutton
and Barto, 2018 ) module for training. This work has been proved to be
comparable with traditional approaches. However, Pointer Networks are
designed for sequential data like texts, while order-invariant encoders are
more appropriate for such work.
Khalil et al. (2017) , Kool et al. (2019) improve the above method by
including graph neural networks. The former work ﬁrst obtains the node
embeddings from structure2vec ( Dai et al., 2016 ), then feed them into a
Q-learning module for making decisions. The latter one builds an
attention-based encoder-decoder system. By replacing reinforcement
learning module with an attention-based decoder, it is more ef ﬁcient for
training. These works achieve better performances than previous algo-
rithms, which prove the representation power of graph neural networks.
More generally, Gasse et al. (2019) represent the state of a combinatorial
problem as a bipartite graph and utilize GCN to encode it.
For speci ﬁc combinatorial optimization problems, Nowak et al.
(2018) focus on Quadratic Assignment Problem i.e. measuring the sim-
ilarity of two graphs. The GNN based model learns node embeddings for
each graph independently and matches them using attention mechanism.
This method offers intriguingly good performance even in regimes where
standard relaxation-based techniques appear to suffer. Zheng et al.
(2020a) use a generative graph neural network to model the
DAG-structure learning problem, which is also a combinatorial optimi-
zation and NP-hard problem. NeuroSAT ( Selsam et al., 2019 ) learns a
message passing neural network to classify the satis ﬁability of SAT
problem. It proves that the learned model can generalize to novel dis-
tributions of SAT and other problems which can be converted to SAT.
Unlike previous works which try to design speci ﬁc GNNs to solve
combinatorial problems, Sato et al. (2019) provide a theoretical analysis
of GNN models on these problems. It establishes connections between
GNNs and the distributed local algorithms which is a group of classical
algorithms on graphs for solving these problems. Moreover, it demon-
strates the optimal approximation ratios to the optimal solutions that the
most powerful GNN can reach. It also proves that most of existing GNN
models cannot exceed this upper bound. Furthermore, it adds coloring to
the node feature to improve the approximation ratios.
8.1.7. Traf ﬁc networks
Predicting trafﬁc states is a challenging task since traf ﬁc networks are
dynamic and have complex dependencies. Cui et al. (2018b) combine
GNNs and LSTMs to capture both spatial and temporal dependencies.
STGCN ( Yu et al., 2018 ) constructs ST-Conv blocks with spatial and
temporal convolution layers, and applies residual connection with
bottleneck strategies. Zheng et al. (2020b) , Guo et al. (2019) both
incorporate attention mechanism to better model spatial temporal
correlation.
8.1.8. Recommendation systems
User-item interaction prediction is one of the classic problems in
recommendation. By modeling the interaction as a graph, GNNs can be
utilized in this area. GC-MC ( van den Berg et al., 2017 ) ﬁrstly applies
GCN on user-item rating graphs to learn user and item embeddings. To
efﬁciently adopt GNNs in web-scale scenarios, PinSage ( Ying et al.,
2018a) builds computational graphs with weighted sampling strategy for
the bipartite graph to reduce repeated computation.
Social recommendation tries to incorporate user social networks to
enhance recommendation performance. GraphRec ( Fan et al., 2019 )
learns user embeddings from both item side and user side. Wu et al.
(2019c) go beyond static social effects. They attempt to model homophily
and inﬂuence effects by dual attentions.
8.1.9. Other Applications in structural scenarios
Because of the ubiquity of graph-structured data, GNNs have been
applied to a larger variety of tasks than what we have introduced above.
We list more scenarios very brieﬂy. In ﬁnancial market, GNNs are used to
model the interaction between different stocks to predict the future
trends of the stocks (Matsunaga et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2018c; Li et al., 2020 ). Kim et al. (2019) also predict the market index
movement by formulating it as a graph classi ﬁcation problem. In
Software-Deﬁned Networks (SDN), GNNs are used to optimize the rout-
ing performance ( Rusek et al., 2019 ). In Abstract Meaning Representa-
tion (AMR) graph to Text generation tasks, Song et al. (2018a), Beck et al.
(2018) use GNNs to encode the graph representation of the abstract
meaning.
8.2. Non-structural scenarios
In this section we will talk about applications on non-structural sce-
narios. Generally, there are two ways to apply GNNs on non-structural
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
73
scenarios: (1) Incorporate structural information from other domains to
improve the performance, for example using information from knowl-
edge graphs to alleviate the zero-shot problems in image tasks; (2) Infer
or assume the relational structure in the task and then apply the model to
solve the problems de ﬁned on graphs, such as the method in ( Zhang
et al., 2018d ) which models text into graphs. Common non-structure
scenarios include image, text, and programming source code ( Allama-
nis et al., 2018 ; Li et al., 2016 ). However, we only give detailed intro-
duction to the ﬁrst two scenarios.
8.2.1. Image
Few(Zero)-shot Image Classi ﬁcation. Image classiﬁcation is a very
basic and important task in the ﬁeld of computer vision, which attracts
much attention and has many famous datasets like ImageNet ( Russa-
kovsky et al., 2015). Recently, zero-shot and few-shot learning become
more and more popular in the ﬁeld of image classi ﬁcation. In N-shot
learning, to make predictions for the test data samples in some classes,
only N training samples in the same classes are provided in the training
set. Thereby, few-shot learning restricts N to be small, and zero-shot re-
quires N to be 0. Models must learn to generalize from the limited
training data to make new predictions for testing data. Graph neural
networks, on the other hand, can assist the image classi ﬁcation system in
these challenging scenarios.
First, knowledge graphs can be used as extra information to guide
zero-shot recognition classi ﬁcation ( Wang et al., 2018d ; Kampffmeyer
et al., 2019 ). Wang et al. (2018d) make the visual classi ﬁers learn not
only from the visual input but also from word embeddings of the cate-
gories’ names and their relationships to other categories. A knowledge
graph is developed to help connect the related categories, and they use a
6-layer GCN to encode the knowledge graph. As the over-smoothing ef-
fect happens when the graph convolution architecture becomes deep, the
6-layer GCN used in ( Wang et al., 2018d ) will wash out much useful
information in the representation. To solve the smoothing problem,
Kampffmeyer et al. (2019) use a single layer GCN with a larger neigh-
borhood which includes both one-hop and multi-hop nodes in the graph.
And it is proven effective in building a zero-shot classi ﬁer from existing
ones. As most knowledge graphs are large for reasoning, Marino et al.
(2017) select some related entities to build a sub-graph based on the
result of object detection and apply GGNN to the extracted graph for
prediction. Besides, Lee et al. (2018b) also leverage the knowledge graph
between categories. It further de ﬁnes three types of relations between
categories: super-subordinate, positive correlation, and negative corre-
lation and propagates the con ﬁdence of relation labels in the graph
directly.
Except for the knowledge graph, the similarity between images in the
dataset is also helpful for the few-shot learning (Garcia and Bruna, 2018).
Garcia and Bruna (2018) build a weighted fully-connected image
network based on the similarity and do message passing in the graph for
few-shot recognition.
Visual Reasoning. Computer-vision systems usually need to perform
reasoning by incorporating both spatial and semantic information. So it is
natural to generate graphs for reasoning tasks.
A typical visual reasoning task is visual question answering (VQA). In
this task, a model needs to answer the questions about an image given the
text description of the questions. Usually, the answer lies in the spatial
relations among objects in the image. Teney et al. (2017) construct an
image scene graph and a question syntactic graph. Then they apply
GGNN to train the embeddings for predicting the ﬁnal answer. Despite
spatial connections among objects, Norcliffebrown et al. (2018) build the
relational graphs conditioned on the questions. With knowledge graphs,
Wang et al. (2018c) , Narasimhan et al. (2018) can perform ﬁner relation
exploration and more interpretable reasoning process.
Other applications of visual reasoning include object detection,
interaction detection, and region classi ﬁcation. In object detection ( Hu
et al., 2018 ; Gu et al., 2018 ), GNNs are used to calculate RoI features. In
interaction detection ( Qi et al., 2018 ; Jain et al., 2016 ), GNNs are
message-passing tools between humans and objects. In region classi ﬁ-
cation ( Chen et al., 2018d ), GNNs perform reasoning on graphs that
connects regions and classes.
Semantic Segmentation. Semantic segmentation is a crucial step
towards image understanding. The task here is to assign a unique label
(or category) to every single pixel in the image, which can be considered
as a dense classi ﬁcation problem. However, regions in images are often
not grid-like and need non-local information, which leads to the failure of
traditional CNN. Several works utilize graph-structured data to handle it.
Liang et al. (2016) use Graph-LSTM to model long-term dependency
together with spatial connections by building graphs in the form of
distance-based superpixel map and applying LSTM to propagate neigh-
borhood information globally. Subsequent work improves it from the
perspective of encoding hierarchical information ( Liang et al., 2017 ).
Furthermore, 3D semantic segmentation (RGBD semantic segmenta-
tion) and point clouds classi ﬁcation utilize more geometric information
and therefore are hard to model by a 2D CNN. Qi et al. (2017b) construct
a k-nearest neighbor (KNN) graph and use a 3D GNN as the propagation
model. After unrolling for several steps, the prediction model takes the
hidden state of each node as input and predicts its semantic label. As
there are always too many points in point clouds classi ﬁcation task,
Landrieu and Simonovsky (2018) solve large-scale 3D point clouds seg-
mentation by building superpoint graphs and generating embeddings for
them. To classify supernodes, Landrieu and Simonovsky (2018) leverage
GGNN and graph convolution. Wang et al. (2018e) propose to model
point interactions through edges. They calculate edge representation
vectors by feeding the coordinates of its terminal nodes. Then node
embeddings are updated by edge aggregation.
8.2.2. Text
The graph neural networks could be applied to several tasks based on
texts. It could be applied to both sentence-level tasks (e.g. text classi ﬁ-
cation) as well as word-level tasks (e.g. sequence labeling). We list
several major applications on text in the following.
Text Classiﬁcation. Text classiﬁcation is an important and classical
problem in natural language processing. Traditional text classi ﬁcation
uses bag-of-words features. However, representing a text as a graph of
words can further capture semantics between non-consecutive and long
distance words ( Peng et al., 2018 ). Peng et al. (2018) use a graph-CNN
based deep learning model to ﬁrst convert texts to graph-of-words, and
then use graph convolution operations in ( Niepert et al., 2016 ) to
convolve the word graph. Zhang et al. (2018d) propose the Sentence
LSTM to encode text. They view the whole sentence as a single state,
which consists of sub-states for individual words and an overall
sentence-level state. They use the global sentence-level representation for
classiﬁcation tasks. These methods either view a document or a sentence
as a graph of word nodes. Yao et al. (2019) regard the documents and
words as nodes to construct the corpus graph and use the Text GCN to
learn embeddings of words and documents. Sentiment classi ﬁcation
could also be regarded as a text classi ﬁcation problem and a Tree-LSTM
approach is proposed by ( Tai et al., 2015 ).
Sequence Labeling. Given a sequence of observed variables (such as
words), sequence labeling is to assign a categorical label for each vari-
able. Typical tasks include POS-tagging, where we label the words in a
sentence by their part-of-speech, and Named Entity Recognition (NER),
where we predict whether each word in a sentence belongs to a part of a
Named Entity. If we consider each variable in the sequence as a node and
the dependencies as edges, we can utilize the hidden state of GNNs to
address the task. Zhang et al. (2018d) utilize the Sentence LSTM to label
the sequence. They have conducted experiments on POS-tagging and
NER tasks and achieves promising performances.
Semantic role labeling is another task of sequence labeling. Marche-
ggiani and Titov (2017) present a Syntactic GCN to solve the problem.
The Syntactic GCN which operates on the direct graph with labeled edges
is a special variant of the GCN ( Kipf and Welling, 2017 ). It integrates
edge-wise gates which let the model regulate contributions of individual
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
74
dependency edges. The Syntactic GCNs over syntactic dependency trees
are used as sentence encoders to learn latent feature representations of
words in the sentence.
Neural Machine Translation. The neural machine translation
(NMT) task is to translate text from source language to target language
automatically using neural networks. It is usually considered as a
sequence-to-sequence task. Transformer ( Vaswani et al., 2017 ) in-
troduces the attention mechanisms and replaces the most commonly used
recurrent or convolutional layers. In fact, the Transformer assumes a fully
connected graph structure between words. Other graph structure can be
explored with GNNs.
One popular application of GNN is to incorporate the syntactic or
semantic information into the NMT task. Bastings et al. (2017) utilize the
Syntactic GCN on syntax-aware NMT tasks. Marcheggiani et al. (2018)
incorporate information about the predicate-argument structure of
source sentences (namely, semantic-role representations) using Syntactic
GCN and compare the results between incorporating only syntactic, only
semantic information and both of the information. Beck et al. (2018)
utilize the GGNN in syntax-aware NMT. They convert the syntactic de-
pendency graph into a new structure called the Levi graph ( Levi, 1942 )
by turning the edges into additional nodes and thus edge labels can be
represented as embeddings.
Relation Extraction. Extracting semantic relations between entities
in texts helps to expand existing knowledge base. Traditional methods
use CNNs or RNNs to learn entities ’feature and predict the relation type
for a pair of entities. A more sophisticated way is to utilize the de-
pendency structure of the sentence. A document graph can be built where
nodes represent words and edges represent various dependencies such as
adjacency, syntactic dependencies and discourse relations. Zhang et al.
(2018f) propose an extension of graph convolutional networks that is
tailored for relation extraction and apply a pruning strategy to the input
trees.
Cross-sentence N-ary relation extraction detects relations among n
entities across multiple sentences. Peng et al. (2017) explore a general
framework for cross-sentence n-ary relation extraction by applying graph
LSTMs on the document graphs. Song et al. (2018b) also use a graph-state
LSTM model and speed up computation by allowing more parallelization.
Event Extraction. Event extraction is an important information
extraction task to recognize instances of speci ﬁed types of events in texts.
This is always conducted by recognizing the event triggers and then
predicting the arguments for each trigger. Nguyen and Grishman (2018)
investigate a convolutional neural network (which is the Syntactic GCN
exactly) based on dependency trees to perform event detection. Liu et al.
(2018) propose a Jointly Multiple Events Extraction (JMEE) framework
to jointly extract multiple event triggers and arguments by introducing
syntactic shortcut arcs to enhance information ﬂow to attention-based
graph convolution networks to model graph information.
Fact Veri ﬁcation. Fact veri ﬁcation is a task requiring models to
extract evidence to verify given claims. However, some claims require
reasoning on multiple pieces of evidence. GNN-based methods like GEAR
(Zhou et al., 2019 ) and KGAT ( Liu et al., 2020 ) are proposed to conduct
evidence aggregating and reasoning based on a fully connected evidence
graph. Zhong et al. (2020) build an inner-sentence graph with the in-
formation from semantic role labeling and achieve promising results.
Other Applications on Text. GNNs can also be applied to many other
tasks on text. For example, GNNs are also used in question answering and
reading comprehension (Song et al., 2018c; De Cao et al., 2019; Qiu et al.,
2019; Tu et al., 2019 ; Ding et al., 2019 ). Another important direction is
relational reasoning, relational networks ( Santoro et al., 2017 ), interac-
tion networks ( Battaglia et al., 2016 ) and recurrent relational networks
(Palm et al., 2018 ) are proposed to solve the relational reasoning task
based on text.
9. Open problems
Although GNNs have achieved great success in different ﬁelds, it is
remarkable that GNN models are not good enough to offer satisfying
solutions for any graph in any condition. In this section, we list some
open problems for further researches.
Robustness. As a family of models based on neural networks, GNNs
are also vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Compared to adversarial at-
tacks on images or text which only focuses on features, attacks on graphs
further consider the structural information. Several works have been
proposed to attack existing graph models ( Zügner et al., 2018 ; Dai et al.,
2018b) and more robust models are proposed to defend ( Zhu et al.,
2019). We refer to ( Sun et al., 2018 ) for a comprehensive review.
Interpretability. Interpretability is also an important research di-
rection for neural models. But GNNs are also black-boxes and lack of
explanations. Only a few methods ( Ying et al., 2019 ; Baldassarre and
Azizpour, 2019) are proposed to generate example-level explanations for
GNN models. It is important to apply GNN models on real-world appli-
cations with trusted explanations. Similar to the ﬁelds of CV and NLP,
interpretability on graphs is also an important direction to investigate.
Graph Pretraining. Neural network-based models require abundant
labeled data and it is costly to obtain enormous human-labeled data. Self-
supervised methods are proposed to guide models to learn from unla-
beled data which is easy to obtain from websites or knowledge bases.
These methods have achieved great success in the area of CV and NLP
with the idea of pretraining ( Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Devlin et al., 2019).
Recently, there have been works focusing on pretraining on graphs ( Qiu
et al., 2020 ; Hu et al., 2020b , 2020e; Zhang et al., 2020 ), but they have
different problem settings and focus on different aspects. This ﬁeld still
has many open problems requiring research efforts, such as the design of
the pretraining tasks, the effectiveness of existing GNN models on
learning structural or feature information, etc.
Complex Graph Structures. Graph structures are ﬂexible and com-
plex in real life applications. Various works are proposed to deal with
complex graph structures such as dynamic graphs or heterogeneous
graphs as we have discussed before. With the rapid development of social
networks on the Internet, there are certainly more problems, challenges
and application scenarios emerging and requiring more powerful models.
10. Conclusion
Over the past few years, graph neural networks have become
powerful and practical tools for machine learning tasks in graph domain.
This progress owes to advances in expressive power, model ﬂexibility,
and training algorithms. In this survey, we conduct a comprehensive
review of graph neural networks. For GNN models, we introduce its
variants categorized by computation modules, graph types, and training
types. Moreover, we also summarize several general frameworks and
introduce several theoretical analyses. In terms of application taxonomy,
we divide the GNN applications into structural scenarios, non-structural
scenarios, and other scenarios, then give a detailed review for applica-
tions in each scenario. Finally, we suggest four open problems indicating
the major challenges and future research directions of graph neural
networks, including robustness, interpretability, pretraining and com-
plex structure modeling.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (No. 2018YFB1004503), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC No.61772302) and the Beijing
Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BAAI). This work is also supported by
2019 Tencent Marketing Solution Rhino-Bird Focused Research Program
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
75
FR201908.
Appendix A. Datasets
Many tasks related to graphs are released to test the performance of various graph neural networks. Such tasks are based on the following commonly
used datasets. We list the datasets in Table A.4.
Table A.4
Datasets commonly used in tasks related to graph.
Field Datasets
Citation Networks Pubmed ( Yang et al., 2016 ) Cora ( Yang et al., 2016 ) Citeseer ( Yang et al., 2016 ) DBLP ( Tang et al., 2008 )
Bio-chemical
Graphs
MUTAG (Debnath et al., 1991 ) NCI-1 (Wale et al., 2008 ) PPI (Zitnik and Leskovec, 2017 )D &D( Dobson and Doig, 2003 ) PROTEIN (Borgwardt et al., 2005 ) PTC
(Toivonen et al., 2003 )
Social Networks Reddit ( Hamilton et al., 2017c ) BlogCatalog ( Zafarani and Liu, 2009 )
Knowledge Graphs FB13 ( Socher et al., 2013 ) FB15K ( Bordes et al., 2013 ) FB15K237 ( Toutanova et al., 2015 ) WN11 ( Socher et al., 2013 ) WN18 ( Bordes et al., 2013 ) WN18RR
(Dettmers et al., 2018 )
There are also a broader range of open source datasets repository which contains more graph datasets. We list them in Table A.5.
Table A.5
Popular graph learning dataset collections.
Repository Introduction Link
Network Repository A scienti ﬁc network data repository interactive visualization and mining tools. http://networkrepository.com
Graph Kernel Datasets Benchmark datasets for graph kernels. https://ls11-www.cs.tu-dortmund.de/staff/m
orris/graphkerneldatasets
Relational Dataset Repository To support the growth of relational machine learning https://relational.ﬁt.cvut.cz/
Stanford Large Network
Dataset Collection
The SNAP library is developed to study large social and information networks. https://snap.stanford.edu/data/
Open Graph Benchmark Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) is a collection of benchmark datasets, data-loaders and
evaluators for graph machine learning in PyTorch.
https://ogb.stanford.edu
Appendix B. Implementations
We ﬁrst list several platforms that provide codes for graph computing in Table B.6.
Table B.6
Popular platforms for graph computing.
Platform Link Reference
PyTorch Geometric https://github.com/rusty1s/pytorch_geometric Fey and Lenssen (2019)
Deep Graph Library https://github.com/dmlc/dgl Wang et al. (2019b)
AliGraph https://github.com/alibaba/aligraph Zhu et al. (2019a)
GraphVite https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/graphvite Zhu et al. (2019b)
Paddle Graph Learning https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PGL
Euler https://github.com/alibaba/euler
Plato https://github.com/tencent/plato
CogDL https://github.com/THUDM/cogdl/
OpenNE https://github.com/thunlp/OpenNE/tree/pytorch
Next we list the hyperlinks of the current open source implementations of some famous GNN models in Table B.7:
Table B.7
Source code of the models mentioned in the survey.
Model Link
GGNN (2015) https://github.com/yujiali/ggnn
Neurals FPs (2015) https://github.com/HIPS/neural-ﬁngerprint
ChebNet (2016) https://github.com/mdeff/cnn_graph
DNGR (2016) https://github.com/ShelsonCao/DNGR
SDNE (2016) https://github.com/suanrong/SDNE
GAE (2016) https://github.com/limaosen0/Variational-Graph-Auto-Encoders
DRNE (2016) https://github.com/tadpole/DRNE
Structural RNN (2016) https://github.com/asheshjain399/RNNexp
DCNN (2016) https://github.com/jcatw/dcnn
GCN (2017) https://github.com/tkipf/gcn
CayleyNet (2017) https://github.com/amoliu/CayleyNet
GraphSage (2017) https://github.com/williamleif/GraphSAGE
GAT (2017) https://github.com/PetarV-/GAT
CLN (2017) https://github.com/trangptm/Column_networks
ECC (2017) https://github.com/mys007/ecc
MPNNs (2017) https://github.com/brain-research/mpnn
MoNet (2017) https://github.com/pierrebaque/GeometricConvolutionsBench
(continued on next column )
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
76
Table B.7 (continued )
Model Link
JK-Net (2018) https://github.com/ShinKyuY/Representation_Learning_on_Graphs_with_Jumping_Knowledge_Networks
SSE (2018) https://github.com/Hanjun-Dai/steady_state_embedding
LGCN (2018) https://github.com/divelab/lgcn/
FastGCN (2018) https://github.com/matenure/FastGCN
DiffPool (2018) https://github.com/RexYing/diffpool
GraphRNN (2018) https://github.com/snap-stanford/GraphRNN
MolGAN (2018) https://github.com/nicola-decao/MolGAN
NetGAN (2018) https://github.com/danielzuegner/netgan
DCRNN (2018) https://github.com/liyaguang/DCRNN
ST-GCN (2018) https://github.com/yysijie/st-gcn
RGCN (2018) https://github.com/tkipf/relational-gcn
AS-GCN (2018) https://github.com/huangwb/AS-GCN
DGCN (2018) https://github.com/ZhuangCY/DGCN
GaAN (2018) https://github.com/jennyzhang0215/GaAN
DGI (2019) https://github.com/PetarV-/DGI
GraphWaveNet (2019) https://github.com/nnzhan/Graph-WaveNet
HAN (2019) https://github.com/Jhy1993/HAN
As the research ﬁled grows rapidly, we recommend our readers the paper list published by our team, GNNPapers ( https://github.com/thunlp/
gnnpapers), for recent papers.
References
Allamanis, M., Brockschmidt, M., Khademi, M., 2018. Learning to represent programs
with graphs. Proc. ICLR .
Atwood, J., Towsley, D., 2016. Diffusion-convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings
of NIPS, pp. 2001 –2009.
Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., Bengio, Y., 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Baldassarre, F., Azizpour, H., 2019. Explainability Techniques for Graph Convolutional
Networks. ICML Workshop on Learning and Reasoning with Graph-Structured
Representations.
Barcel/C19o, P., Kostylev, E.V., Monet, M., P /C19erez, J., Reutter, J., Silva, J.P., 2019. The logical
expressiveness of graph neural networks. Proceedings of ICLR .
Bastings, J., Titov, I., Aziz, W., Marcheggiani, D., Simaan, K., 2017. Graph convolutional
encoders for syntax-aware neural machine translation. In: Proceedings of EMNLP,
pp. 1957 –1967.
Battaglia, P., Pascanu, R., Lai, M., Rezende, D.J., et al., 2016. Interaction networks for
learning about objects, relations and physics. Proceedings of NIPS 4509 –4517.
Battaglia, P.W., Hamrick, J.B., Bapst, V., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Zambaldi, V.,
Malinowski, M., Tacchetti, A., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Faulkner, R., et al., 2018.
Relational Inductive Biases, Deep Learning, and Graph Networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01261.
Beck, D., Haffari, G., Cohn, T., 2018. Graph-to-sequence learning using gated graph
neural networks. Proceedings of ACL 273 –283.
Bello, I., Pham, H., Le, Q.V., Norouzi, M., Bengio, S., 2017. Neural Combinatorial
Optimization with Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09940 .
Bojchevski, A., Klicpera, J., Perozzi, B., Kapoor, A., Blais, M., R /C19ozemberczki, B.,
Lukasik, M., Günnemann, S., 2020. Scaling graph neural networks with approximate
pagerank. In: Proceedings of KDD. ACM, pp. 2464 –2473.
Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., Weston, J., Yakhnenko, O., 2013. Translating
embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. Proceedings of NIPS 1 –9.
Borgwardt, K.M., Ong, C.S., Sch €onauer, S., Vishwanathan, S., Smola, A.J., Kriegel, H.-P.,
2005. Protein function prediction via graph kernels. Bioinformatics 21, i47 –i56.
Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Rodol /C18a, E., Bronstein, M., 2016. Learning shape correspondence
with anisotropic convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings of NIPS,
pp. 3197 –3205.
Bronstein, M.M., Bruna, J., LeCun, Y., Szlam, A., Vandergheynst, P., 2017. Geometric
deep learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE SPM 34, 18 –42.
Bruna, J., Zaremba, W., Szlam, A., Lecun, Y., 2014. Spectral networks and locally
connected networks on graphs. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Buades, A., Coll, B., Morel, J.-M., 2005. A non-local algorithm for image denoising.
Proceedings of CVPR, 2. IEEE, pp. 60 –65.
Cai, H., Zheng, V.W., Chang, K.C.-C., 2017. Active Learning for Graph Embedding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.05085 .
Cai, H., Zheng, V.W., Chang, K.C.-C., 2018. A comprehensive survey of graph embedding:
problems, techniques, and applications. IEEE TKDE 30, 1616 –1637.
Chami, I., Abu-El-Haija, S., Perozzi, B., R /C19e, C., Murphy, K., 2020. Machine Learning on
Graphs: A Model and Comprehensive Taxonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03675 .
Chang, M., Ullman, T., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J.B., 2017. A compositional object-based
approach to learning physical dynamics. Proceedings of ICLR .
Chen, J., Zhu, J., Song, L., 2018a. Stochastic training of graph convolutional networks
with variance reduction. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 942 –950.
Chen, J., Ma, T., Xiao, C., 2018b. Fastgcn: fast learning with graph convolutional
networks via importance sampling. Proceedings of ICLR .
Chen, Y., Wei, Z., Huang, X., 2018c. Incorporating corporation relationship via graph
convolutional neural networks for stock price prediction. In: Proceedings of CIKM,
pp. 1655 –1658.
Chen, X., Li, L.-J., Fei-Fei, L., Gupta, A., 2018d. Iterative visual reasoning beyond
convolutions. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 7239 –7248.
Chen, Z., Villar, S., Chen, L., Bruna, J., 2019. On the equivalence between graph
isomorphism testing and function approximation with gnns. In: Proceedings of
NeurIPS, pp. 15894 –15902.
Chen, L., Li, J., Peng, J., Xie, T., Cao, Z., Xu, K., He, X., Zheng, Z., 2020a. A Survey of
Adversarial Learning on Graphs arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05730 .
Chen, D., Lin, Y., Li, W., Li, P., Zhou, J., Sun, X., 2020b. Measuring and relieving the over-
smoothing problem for graph neural networks from the topological view.
Proceedings of AAAI 3438 –3445.
Cheng, J., Dong, L., Lapata, M., 2016. Long short-term memory-networks for machine
reading. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 551 –561.
Chiang, W.-L., Liu, X., Si, S., Li, Y., Bengio, S., Hsieh, C.-J., 2019. Cluster-gcn: an ef ﬁcient
algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings
of KDD, pp. 257 –266.
Cho, K., Van Merrienboer, B., Gulcehre, C., Bahdanau, D., Bougares, F., Schwenk, H.,
Bengio, Y., 2014. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder –decoder for
statistical machine translation. Proceedings of EMNLP 1724 –1734.
Cui, P., Wang, X., Pei, J., Zhu, W., 2018a. A survey on network embedding. IEEE TKDE
833–852.
Cui, Z., Henrickson, K., Ke, R., Wang, Y., 2018b. Traf ﬁc Graph Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Network: A Deep Learning Framework for Network-Scale Traf ﬁc Learning and
Forecasting arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07007 .
Cui, G., Zhou, J., Yang, C., Liu, Z., 2020. Adaptive graph encoder for attributed graph
embedding. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 976 –985.
Dai, H., Dai, B., Song, L., 2016. Discriminative embeddings of latent variable models for
structured data. Proceedings of ICML 2702 –2711.
Dai, H., Kozareva, Z., Dai, B., Smola, A., Song, L., 2018a. Learning steady-states of
iterative algorithms over graphs. Proceedings of ICML 1106 –1114.
Dai, H., Li, H., Tian, T., Huang, X., Wang, L., Zhu, J., Song, L., 2018b. Adversarial attack
on graph structured data. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 1115 –1124.
De Cao, N., Kipf, T., 2018. MolGAN: an Implicit Generative Model for Small Molecular
Graphs. ICML 2018 Workshop on Theoretical Foundations and Applications of Deep
Generative Models .
De Cao, N., Aziz, W., Titov, I., 2019. Question answering by reasoning across documents
with graph convolutional networks. Proceedings of NAACL 2306 –2317.
Debnath, A.K., Lopez de Compadre, R.L., Debnath, G., Shusterman, A.J., Hansch, C., 1991.
Structure-activity relationship of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic nitro
compounds. J. Med. Chem. 786 –797.
Defferrard, M., Bresson, X., Vandergheynst, P., 2016. Convolutional neural networks on
graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 3844 –3852.
Dehmamy, N., Barab /C19asi, A.-L., Yu, R., 2019. Understanding the representation power of
graph neural networks in learning graph topology. Proceedings of NeurIPS
15413–15423.
Derr, T., Ma, Y., Tang, J., 2018. Signed graph convolutional networks. Proceedings of
ICDM, pp. 929 –934.
Dettmers, T., Minervini, P., Stenetorp, P., Riedel, S., 2018. Convolutional 2d knowledge
graph embeddings. Proceedings of AAAI 1811 –1818.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. Bert: pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Proceedings of NAACL
4171–4186.
Dhillon, I.S., Guan, Y., Kulis, B., 2007. Weighted graph cuts without eigenvectors a
multilevel approach. IEEE TPAMI 29, 1944 –1957.
Ding, M., Zhou, C., Chen, Q., Yang, H., Tang, J., 2019. Cognitive graph for multi-hop
reading comprehension at scale. In: Proceedings of ACL, pp. 2694 –2703.
Do, K., Tran, T., Venkatesh, S., 2019. Graph transformation policy network for chemical
reaction prediction. Proceedings of SIGKDD 750 –760.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
77
Dobson, P.D., Doig, A.J., 2003. Distinguishing enzyme structures from non-enzymes
without alignments. J. Mol. Biol. 330, 771 –783.
Duvenaud, D.K., Maclaurin, D., Aguileraiparraguirre, J., Gomezbombarelli, R.,
Hirzel, T.D., Aspuruguzik, A., Adams, R.P., 2015. Convolutional networks on graphs
for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 2224 –2232.
Dwivedi, V.P., Joshi, C.K., Laurent, T., Bengio, Y., Bresson, X., 2020. Benchmarking Graph
Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00982 .
Errica, F., Podda, M., Bacciu, D., Micheli, A., 2020. A fair comparison of graph neural
networks for graph classi ﬁcation. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Fan, W., Ma, Y., Li, Q., He, Y., Zhao, E., Tang, J., Yin, D., 2019. Graph neural networks for
social recommendation. In: Proceedings of WWW, pp. 417 –426.
Feng, Y., You, H., Zhang, Z., Ji, R., Gao, Y., 2019. Hypergraph neural networks. In:
Proceedings of AAAI, vol. 33, pp. 3558 –3565.
Fey, M., Lenssen, J.E., 2019. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric.
In: ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds .
Fout, A., Byrd, J., Shariat, B., Ben-Hur, A., 2017. Protein interface prediction using graph
convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 6533 –6542.
Frasconi, P., Gori, M., Sperduti, A., 1998. A general framework for adaptive processing of
data structures. IEEE TNN 9, 768 –786.
Fu, X., Zhang, J., Meng, Z., King, I., Magnn, 2020. Metapath aggregated graph neural
network for heterogeneous graph embedding. Proceedings of WWW 2331 –2341.
Gallicchio, C., Micheli, A., 2010. Graph echo state networks. In: Proceedings of IJCNN.
IEEE, pp. 1 –8.
Gao, H., Ji, S., 2019. Graph u-nets. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 2083 –2092.
Gao, H., Wang, Z., Ji, S., 2018a. Large-scale learnable graph convolutional networks. In:
Proceedings of KDD. ACM, pp. 1416 –1424.
Gao, L., Yang, H., Zhou, C., Wu, J., Pan, S., Hu, Y., 2018b. Active discriminative network
representation learning. In: Proceedings of IJCAI .
Garcia, V., Bruna, J., 2018. Few-shot learning with graph neural networks. Proceedings of
ICLR.
Garg, V.K., Jegelka, S., Jaakkola, T., 2020. Generalization and representational limits of
graph neural networks. Proceedings of ICML 3419 –3430.
Gasse, M., Ch /C19etelat, D., Ferroni, N., Charlin, L., Lodi, A., 2019. Exact combinatorial
optimization with graph convolutional neural networks. In: Proceedings of NeurIPS,
pp. 15580 –15592.
Gehring, J., Auli, M., Grangier, D., Dauphin, Y.N., 2017. A convolutional encoder model
for neural machine translation. In: Proceedings of ACL, 1, pp. 123 –135.
Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S.S., Riley, P.F., Vinyals, O., Dahl, G.E., 2017. Neural message
passing for quantum chemistry. Proceedings of ICML 1263 –1272.
Gori, M., Monfardini, G., Scarselli, F., 2005. A new model for learning in graph domains.
Proceedings of IJCNN, 2. IEEE, pp. 729 –734.
Goyal, P., Ferrara, E., 2018. Graph embedding techniques, applications, and performance:
a survey. Knowl. Base Sys. 151, 78 –94.
Grover, A., Leskovec, J., 2016. node2vec: scalable feature learning for networks. In:
Proceedings of KDD. ACM, pp. 855 –864.
Grover, A., Zweig, A., Ermon, S., 2019. Graphite: iterative generative modeling of graphs.
In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 2434 –2444.
Gu, J., Hu, H., Wang, L., Wei, Y., Dai, J., 2018. Learning region features for object
detection. In: Proceedings of ECCV, pp. 381 –395.
Guo, S., Lin, Y., Feng, N., Song, C., Wan, H., 2019. Attention based spatial-temporal graph
convolutional networks for traf ﬁc ﬂow forecasting. Proceedings of AAAI 33,
922–929.
Hamaguchi, T., Oiwa, H., Shimbo, M., Matsumoto, Y., 2017. Knowledge transfer for out-
of-knowledge-base entities : a graph neural network approach. In: Proceedings of
IJCAI, pp. 1802 –1808. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/250.
Hamilton, W.L., Ying, Z., Leskovec, J., 2017a. Inductive representation learning on large
graphs. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 1024 –1034.
Hamilton, W.L., Ying, R., Leskovec, J., 2017b. Representation learning on graphs:
methods and applications. IEEE Data(base) Engineering Bulletin 40, 52 –74.
Hamilton, W.L., Zhang, J., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Jurafsky, D., Leskovec, J., 2017c.
Loyalty in online communities. In: Proceedings of ICWSM, pp. 540 –543.
Hammer, B., Micheli, A., Sperduti, A., Strickert, M., 2004. Recursive self-organizing
network models. Neural Network. 17, 1061 –1085.
Hammond, D.K., Vandergheynst, P., Gribonval, R., 2011. Wavelets on graphs via spectral
graph theory. Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 30, 129 –150.
Hassani, K., Khasahmadi, A.H., 2020. Contrastive multi-view representation learning on
graphs. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 4116 –4126.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016a. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In:
Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 770 –778.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016b. Identity mappings in deep residual networks. In:
Proceedings of ECCV. Springer, pp. 630 –645.
Henaff, M., Bruna, J., Lecun, Y., 2015. Deep Convolutional Networks on Graph-Structured
Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05163 .
Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural comput. 9,
1735–1780.
Hoshen, Y., 2017. Vain: attentional multi-agent predictive modeling. In: Proceedings of
NIPS, pp. 2698 –2708.
Hu, H., Gu, J., Zhang, Z., Dai, J., Wei, Y., 2018. Relation networks for object detection. In:
Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 3588 –3597.
Hu, Z., Dong, Y., Wang, K., Sun, Y., 2020a. Heterogeneous graph transformer. In:
Proceedings of WWW, pp. 2704 –2710.
Hu, Z., Dong, Y., Wang, K., Chang, K.-W., Sun, Y., 2020b. Gpt-gnn: generative pre-training
of graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 1857 –1867.
Hu, S., Xiong, Z., Qu, M., Yuan, X., C ^ot/C19e, M.-A., Liu, Z., Tang, J., 2020c. Graph policy
network for transferable active learning on graphs. In: Proceedings of NeurIPS, 33 .
Hu, W., Fey, M., Zitnik, M., Dong, Y., Ren, H., Liu, B., Catasta, M., Leskovec, J., 2020d.
Open graph benchmark: datasets for machine learning on graphs. Proceedings of
NeurIPS.
Hu, W., Liu, B., Gomes, J., Zitnik, M., Liang, P., Pande, V., Leskovec, J., 2020e. Strategies
for pre-training graph neural networks. Proceedings of ICLR .
Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L., Weinberger, K.Q., 2017. Densely connected
convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 4700 –4708.
Huang, W., Zhang, T., Rong, Y., Huang, J., 2018. Adaptive sampling towards fast graph
representation learning. Proceedings of NeurIPS 4558 –4567.
Huang, Y., Xu, H., Duan, Z., Ren, A., Feng, J., Wang, X., 2020. Modeling Complex Spatial
Patterns with Temporal Features via Heterogenous Graph Embedding Networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.08617 .
Jaeger, H., 2001. The “Echo State” Approach to Analysing and Training Recurrent Neural
Networks-With an Erratum Note, vol. 148. German National Research Center for
Information Technology GMD Technical Report, p. 13 .
Jain, A., Zamir, A.R., Savarese, S., Saxena, A., 2016. Structural-rnn: deep learning on
spatio-temporal graphs. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 5308 –5317.
Kampffmeyer, M., Chen, Y., Liang, X., Wang, H., Zhang, Y., Xing, E.P., 2019. Rethinking
Knowledge Graph Propagation for Zero-Shot Learning. Proceedings of CVPR,
pp. 11487 –11496.
Kearnes, S., McCloskey, K., Berndl, M., Pande, V., Riley, P., 2016. Molecular graph
convolutions: moving beyond ﬁngerprints. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 30, 595 –608.
Keriven, N., Peyr /C19e, G., 2019. Universal invariant and equivariant graph neural networks.
In: Proceedings of NeurIPS, pp. 7092 –7101.
Khalil, E., Dai, H., Zhang, Y., Dilkina, B., Song, L., 2017. Learning combinatorial
optimization algorithms over graphs. Proceedings of NIPS 6348 –6358.
Khamsi, M.A., Kirk, W.A., 2011. An Introduction to Metric Spaces and Fixed Point Theory,
vol. 53. John Wiley & Sons.
Kim, R., So, C.H., Jeong, M., Lee, S., Kim, J., Kang, J., 2019. Hats: A Hierarchical Graph
Attention Network for Stock Movement Prediction arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07999 .
Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2016. Variational graph auto-encoders. In: NIPS Bayesian Deep
Learning Workshop .
Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2017. Semi-supervised classi ﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks. Proceedings of ICLR .
Kipf, T.N., Fetaya, E., Wang, K., Welling, M., Zemel, R.S., 2018. Neural relational
inference for interacting systems. In: Proceedings of ICML. PMLR, pp. 2688 –2697.
Klicpera, J., Bojchevski, A., Günnemann, S., 2019. Predict then propagate: graph neural
networks meet personalized pagerank. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Knyazev, B., Taylor, G.W., Amer, M., 2019. Understanding attention and generalization in
graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of NeurIPS, pp. 4202 –4212.
Kool, W., van Hoof, H., Welling, M., 2019. Attention, learn to solve routing problems!. In:
Proceedings of ICLR .
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.E., 2012. Imagenet classi ﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. Proceedings of NIPS 1097 –1105.
Landrieu, L., Simonovsky, M., 2018. Large-scale point cloud semantic segmentation with
superpoint graphs. Proceedings of CVPR 4558 –4567.
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., Haffner, P., 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE, 86, pp. 2278 –2324.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436 –444.
Lee, J.B., Rossi, R.A., Kim, S., Ahmed, N.K., Koh, E., 2018a. Attention Models in Graphs: A
Survey. TKDD 13, 1 –25.
Lee, C., Fang, W., Yeh, C., Wang, Y.F., 2018b. Multi-label zero-shot learning with
structured knowledge graphs. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 1576 –1585.
Lee, J., Lee, I., Kang, J., 2019. Self-attention graph pooling. In: Proceedings of ICML,
pp. 3734 –3743.
Levi, F.W., 1942. Finite Geometrical Systems: Six Public Lectues Delivered in February,
1940. the University of Calcutta, University of Calcutta .
Levie, R., Huang, W., Bucci, L., Bronstein, M.M., Kutyniok, G., 2019. Transferability of
Spectral Graph Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.12972 .
Li, Y., Tarlow, D., Brockschmidt, M., Zemel, R.S., 2016. Gated graph sequence neural
networks. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Li, R., Wang, S., Zhu, F., Huang, J., 2018a. Adaptive graph convolutional neural networks.
In: Proceedings of AAAI, 32, 2018 .
Li, Y., Yu, R., Shahabi, C., Liu, Y., 2018b. Diffusion convolutional recurrent neural
network: Data-driven traf ﬁc forecasting. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Li, Q., Han, Z., Wu, X.-M., 2018c. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
semi-supervised learning. Proceedings of AAAI 32 .
Li, Y., Vinyals, O., Dyer, C., Pascanu, R., Battaglia, P., 2018d. Learning Deep Generative
Models of Graphs arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03324 .
Li, Z., Chen, Q., Koltun, V., 2018e. Combinatorial optimization with graph convolutional
networks and guided tree search. Proceedings of NeurIPS 537 –546.
Li, G., Muller, M., Thabet, A., Ghanem, B., 2019a. Deepgcns: can gcns go as deep as cnns?.
In: Proceedings of ICCV, pp. 9267 –9276.
Li, Y., Gu, C., Dullien, T., Vinyals, O., Kohli, P., 2019b. Graph Matching Networks for
Learning the Similarity of Graph Structured Objects. In: Proceedings of ICML,
pp. 3835 –3845.
Li, W., Bao, R., Harimoto, K., Chen, D., Xu, J., Su, Q., 2020. Modeling the stock relation
with graph network for overnight stock movement prediction. In: Proceedings of
IJCAI, pp. 4541 –4547.
Liang, X., Shen, X., Feng, J., Lin, L., Yan, S., 2016. Semantic object parsing with graph
lstm. In: Proceedings of ECCV, pp. 125 –143.
Liang, X., Lin, L., Shen, X., Feng, J., Yan, S., Xing, E.P., 2017. Interpretable structure-
evolving lstm. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 2175 –2184.
Liu, X., Luo, Z., Huang, H., 2018. Jointly multiple events extraction via attention-based
graph information aggregation. Proceedings of EMNLP 1247 –1256.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
78
Liu, J., Kumar, A., Ba, J., Kiros, J., Swersky, K., 2019. Graph normalizing ﬂows. In:
Proceedings of NeurIPS, pp. 13578 –13588.
Liu, Z., Xiong, C., Sun, M., Liu, Z., 2020. Fine-grained fact veri ﬁcation with kernel graph
attention network. In: Proceedings of ACL, pp. 7342 –7351.
Loukas, A., 2020. What graph neural networks cannot learn: depth vs width. In:
Proceedings of ICLR .
Ma, T., Chen, J., Xiao, C., 2018. Constrained generation of semantically valid graphs via
regularizing variational autoencoders. Proceedings of NeurIPS 7113 –7124.
Ma, Y., Wang, S., Aggarwal, C.C., Tang, J., 2019a. Graph convolutional networks with
eigenpooling. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 723 –731.
Ma, Y., Wang, S., Aggarwal, C.C., Yin, D., Tang, J., 2019b. Multi-dimensional graph
convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of SDM, pp. 657 –665.
Mallat, S., 1999. A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing. Elsevier .
Manessi, F., Rozza, A., Manzo, M., 2020. Dynamic graph convolutional networks. Pattern
Recogn. 97, 107000 .
Marcheggiani, D., Titov, I., 2017. Encoding sentences with graph convolutional networks
for semantic role labeling. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 1506 –1515.
Marcheggiani, D., Bastings, J., Titov, I., 2018. Exploiting semantics in neural machine
translation with graph convolutional networks. Proceedings of NAACL 486 –492.
Marino, K., Salakhutdinov, R., Gupta, A., 2017. The more you know: using knowledge
graphs for image classi ﬁcation. Proceedings of CVPR 20 –28.
Maron, H., Ben-Hamu, H., Shamir, N., Lipman, Y., 2019a. Invariant and equivariant graph
networks. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Maron, H., Fetaya, E., Segol, N., Lipman, Y., 2019b. On the universality of invariant
networks. In: Proceedings of ICML. PMLR, pp. 4363 –4371.
Masci, J., Boscaini, D., Bronstein, M., Vandergheynst, P., 2015. Geodesic convolutional
neural networks on riemannian manifolds. ICCV workshops 37 –45.
Matsunaga, D., Suzumura, T., Takahashi, T., 2019. Exploring Graph Neural Networks for
Stock Market Predictions with Rolling Window Analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1909.10660.
Micheli, A., 2009. Neural network for graphs: a contextual constructive approach. IEEE
TNN 20, 498 –511.
Micheli, A., Sona, D., Sperduti, A., 2004. Contextual processing of structured data by
recursive cascade correlation. IEEE TNN 15, 1396 –1410.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J., 2013. Ef ﬁcient estimation of word
representations in vector space. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Miwa, M., Bansal, M., 2016. End-to-end relation extraction using lstms on sequences and
tree structures. Proceedings of ACL 1105 –1116.
Monti, F., Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Rodola, E., Svoboda, J., Bronstein, M.M., 2017.
Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In:
Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 5425 –5434.
Morris, C., Ritzert, M., Fey, M., Hamilton, W.L., Lenssen, J.E., Rattan, G., Grohe, M., 2019.
Weisfeiler and leman go neural: higher-order graph neural networks. Proceedings of
AAAI 33, 4602 –4609.
Narasimhan, M., Lazebnik, S., Schwing, A.G., 2018. Out of the box: reasoning with graph
convolution nets for factual visual question answering. In: Proceedings of NeurIPS,
pp. 2654 –2665.
Nguyen, T.H., Grishman, R., 2018. Graph convolutional networks with argument-aware
pooling for event detection. Proceedings of AAAI 5900 –5907.
Niepert, M., Ahmed, M., Kutzkov, K., 2016. Learning convolutional neural networks for
graphs. Proceedings of ICML 2014 –2023.
Norcliffebrown, W., Vafeias, S., Parisot, S., 2018. Learning conditioned graph structures
for interpretable visual question answering. In: Proceedings of NeurIPS,
pp. 8334 –8343.
Nowak, A., Villar, S., Bandeira, A.S., Bruna, J., 2018. Revised note on learning quadratic
assignment with graph neural networks. In: IEEE DSW. IEEE, pp. 1 –5.
Nt, H., Maehara, T., 2019. Revisiting Graph Neural Networks: All We Have Is Low-Pass
Filters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09550 .
Oono, K., Suzuki, T., 2020. Graph neural networks exponentially lose expressive power
for node classi ﬁcation. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Palm, R., Paquet, U., Winther, O., 2018. Recurrent relational networks. Proceedings of
NeurIPS 3368 –3378.
Pan, S., Hu, R., Long, G., Jiang, J., Yao, L., Zhang, C., 2018. Adversarially regularized
graph autoencoder for graph embedding. Proceedings of IJCAI 2609 –2615.
Pareja, A., Domeniconi, G., Chen, J., Ma, T., Suzumura, T., Kanezashi, H., Kaler, T.,
Schardl, T., Leiserson, C., 2020. Evolvegcn: evolving graph convolutional networks
for dynamic graphs. Proceedings of AAAI 34, 5363 –5370.
Park, J., Lee, M., Chang, H.J., Lee, K., Choi, J.Y., 2019. Symmetric graph convolutional
autoencoder for unsupervised graph representation learning. In: Proceedings of ICCV,
pp. 6519 –6528.
Peng, N., Poon, H., Quirk, C., Toutanova, K., Yih, W.-t., 2017. Cross-sentence n-ary
relation extraction with graph lstms. TACL 5, 101 –115.
Peng, H., Li, J., He, Y., Liu, Y., Bao, M., Wang, L., Song, Y., Yang, Q., 2018. Large-scale
hierarchical text classi ﬁcation with recursively regularized deep graph-cnn. In:
Proceedings of WWW, pp. 1063 –1072.
Peng, Y., Choi, B., Xu, J., 2020. Graph Embedding for Combinatorial Optimization: A
Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.12646 .
Perozzi, B., Al-Rfou, R., Skiena, S., 2014. Deepwalk: online learning of social
representations. In: Proceedings of KDD. ACM, pp. 701 –710.
Pham, T., Tran, T., Phung, D., Venkatesh, S., 2017. Column networks for collective
classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of AAAI, pp. 2485 –2491.
Qi, C.R., Su, H., Mo, K., Guibas, L.J., 2017a. Pointnet: deep learning on point sets for 3d
classiﬁcation and segmentation. Proceedings of CVPR 652-660 .
Qi, X., Liao, R., Jia, J., Fidler, S., Urtasun, R., 2017b. 3d graph neural networks for rgbd
semantic segmentation. Proceedings of CVPR 5199 –5208.
Qi, S., Wang, W., Jia, B., Shen, J., Zhu, S.-C., 2018. Learning human-object interactions by
graph parsing neural networks. In: Proceedings of ECCV, pp. 401 –417.
Qiu, L., Xiao, Y., Qu, Y., Zhou, H., Li, L., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., 2019. Dynamically fused graph
network for multi-hop reasoning. In: Proceedings of ACL, pp. 6140 –6150.
Qiu, J., Chen, Q., Dong, Y., Zhang, J., Yang, H., Ding, M., Wang, K., Tang, J., 2020. Gcc:
graph contrastive coding for graph neural network pre-training. Proceedings of KDD
1150–1160.
Rahimi, A., Cohn, T., Baldwin, T., 2018. Semi-supervised user geolocation via graph
convolutional networks. In: Proceeding of ACL, vol. 1, pp. 2009 –2019.
Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Barrett, D.G.T., Pascanu, R., Lillicrap, T.P., Battaglia, P., 2017.
Discovering objects and their relations from entangled scene representations.
Proceedings of ICLR .
Rhee, S., Seo, S., Kim, S., 2018. Hybrid Approach of Relation Network and Localized
Graph Convolutional Filtering for Breast Cancer Subtype Classi ﬁcation. In:
Proceedings of IJCAI, pp. 3527 –3534.
Riba, P., Fischer, A., Llad /C19os, J., Forn /C19es, A., 2018. Learning graph distances with message
passing neural networks. In: Proceedings of ICPR. IEEE, pp. 2239 –2244.
Rossi, A., Tiezzi, M., Dimitri, G.M., Bianchini, M., Maggini, M., Scarselli, F., 2018.
Inductive–transductive learning with graph neural networks. In: IAPR Workshop on
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks in Pattern Recognition. Springer, pp. 201 –212.
Ruiz, L., Chamon, L.F., Ribeiro, A., 2020. Graphon neural networks and the transferability
of graph neural networks. In: Proceeding of NeurIPS, 33 .
Rusek, K., Su /C19arez-Varela, J., Mestres, A., Barlet-Ros, P., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., 2019.
Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for network modeling and
optimization in sdn. In: Proceedings of SOSR, pp. 140 –151.
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A.,
Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., et al., 2015. Imagenet large scale visual recognition
challenge. In: Proceedings of IJCV, 115, pp. 211 –252.
Sanchez, A., Heess, N., Springenberg, J.T., Merel, J., Hadsell, R., Riedmiller, M.A.,
Battaglia, P., 2018. Graph networks as learnable physics engines for inference and
control. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 4470 –4479.
Santoro, A., Raposo, D., Barrett, D.G., Malinowski, M., Pascanu, R., Battaglia, P.,
Lillicrap, T., 2017. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning.
Proceedings of NIPS 4967 –4976.
Sato, R., Yamada, M., Kashima, H., 2019. Approximation ratios of graph neural networks
for combinatorial problems. Proceedings of NeurIPS, pp. 4081 –4090.
Scarselli, F., Gori, M., Tsoi, A.C., Hagenbuchner, M., Monfardini, G., 2009. The graph
neural network model. IEEE TNN 20, 61 –80.
Scarselli, F., Tsoi, A.C., Hagenbuchner, M., 2018. The vapnik –chervonenkis dimension of
graph and recursive neural networks. Neural Network 108, 248 –259.
Schlichtkrull, M., Kipf, T.N., Bloem, P., van den Berg, R., Titov, I., Welling, M., 2018.
Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of
ESWC. Springer, pp. 593 –607.
Selsam, D., Lamm, M., Bünz, B., Liang, P., de Moura, L., Dill, D.L., 2019. Learning a SAT
solver from single-bit supervision. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Shang, C., Tang, Y., Huang, J., Bi, J., He, X., Zhou, B., 2019. End-to-end structure-aware
convolutional networks for knowledge base completion. Proceedings of AAAI 33,
3060–3067.
Shchur, O., Mumme, M., Bojchevski, A., Günnemann, S., 2018a. Pitfalls of graph neural
network evaluation arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.05868 .
Shchur, O., Zugner, D., Bojchevski, A., Gunnemann, S., 2018b. Netgan: generating graphs
via random walks. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 609 –618.
Shi, C., Xu, M., Zhu, Z., Zhang, W., Zhang, M., Tang, J., 2020. Graphaf: a Flow-Based
Autoregressive Model for Molecular Graph Generation. Proceedings of ICLR .
Shuman, D.I., Narang, S.K., Frossard, P., Ortega, A., Vandergheynst, P., 2013. The
emerging ﬁeld of signal processing on graphs: extending high-dimensional data
analysis to networks and other irregular domains. IEEE SPM 30, 83 –98.
Simonovsky, M., Komodakis, N., 2017. Dynamic edge-conditioned ﬁlters in convolutional
neural networks on graphs. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 3693 –3702.
Socher, R., Chen, D., Manning, C.D., Ng, A., 2013. Reasoning with neural tensor networks
for knowledge base completion. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 926 –934.
Song, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Gildea, D., 2018a. A graph-to-sequence model for amr-to-
text generation. In: Proceedings of ACL, pp. 1616 –1626.
Song, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Gildea, D., 2018b. N-ary relation extraction using graph
state lstm. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 2226 –2235.
Song, L., Wang, Z., Yu, M., Zhang, Y., Florian, R., Gildea, D., 2018c. Exploring Graph-
Structured Passage Representation for Multi-Hop Reading Comprehension with
Graph Neural Networks arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02040" .
Sperduti, A., Starita, A., 1997. Supervised neural networks for the classi ﬁcation of
structures. IEEE TNN 8, 714 –735.
Sukhbaatar, S., Fergus, R., et al., 2016. Learning multiagent communication with
backpropagation. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 2244 –2252.
Sun, Y., Han, J., Yan, X., Yu, P.S., Wu, T., 2011. Pathsim: Meta Path-Based Top-K
Similarity Search in Heterogeneous Information Networks. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, vol. 4, pp. 992 –1003.
Sun, L., Wang, J., Yu, P.S., Li, B., 2018. Adversarial Attack and Defense on Graph Data: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.10528.
Sun, F.-Y., Hoffmann, J., Verma, V., Tang, J., 2020. Infograph: unsupervised and semi-
supervised graph-level representation learning via mutual information maximization.
Proceedings of ICLR .
Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G., 2018. Reinforcement Learning: an Introduction. MIT press .
Tai, K.S., Socher, R., Manning, C.D., 2015. Improved semantic representations from tree-
structured long short-term memory networks. In: Proceeding of IJCNLP,
pp. 1556 –1566.
Tang, J., Zhang, J., Yao, L., Li, J., Zhang, L., Su, Z., 2008. Arnetminer: extraction and
mining of academic social networks. In: Proceedings of KDD. ACM, pp. 990 –998.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
79
Tang, J., Qu, M., Wang, M., Zhang, M., Yan, J., Mei, Q., 2015. Line: large-scale
information network embedding. In: Proceedings of WWW, pp. 1067 –1077.
Teney, D., Liu, L., Den Hengel, A.V., 2017. Graph-structured representations for visual
question answering. In: Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 3233 –3241.
Tiezzi, M., Marra, G., Melacci, S., Maggini, M., 2020. Deep Lagrangian Constraint-Based
Propagation in Graph Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.02392 .
Toivonen, H., Srinivasan, A., King, R.D., Kramer, S., Helma, C., 2003. Statistical
evaluation of the predictive toxicology challenge 2000 –2001. Bioinformatics 19,
1183–1193.
Toutanova, K., Chen, D., Pantel, P., Poon, H., Choudhury, P., Gamon, M., 2015.
Representing text for joint embedding of text and knowledge bases. In: Proceedings
of EMNLP, pp. 1499 –1509.
Tsitsulin, A., Palowitch, J., Perozzi, B., Müller, E., 2020. Graph Clustering with Graph
Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16904 .
Tu, M., Wang, G., Huang, J., Tang, Y., He, X., Zhou, B., 2019. Multi-hop reading
comprehension across multiple documents by reasoning over heterogeneous graphs.
In: Proceedings of ACL, pp. 2704 –2713.
van den Berg, R., Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2017. Graph convolutional matrix completion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02263 .
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Jones, L., Uszkoreit, J., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.,
2017. Attention is all you need. In: Proceeding of NIPS, pp. 5998 –6008.
Velickovic, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y., 2018. Graph
attention networks. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Velickovic, P., Fedus, W., Hamilton, W.L., Li /C18o, P., Bengio, Y., Hjelm, R.D., 2019. Deep
graph infomax. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Verma, S., Zhang, Z.-L., 2019. Stability and generalization of graph convolutional neural
networks. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 1539 –1548.
Vinyals, O., Bengio, S., Kudlur, M., 2015a. Order Matters: Sequence to Sequence for Sets
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06391 .
Vinyals, O., Fortunato, M., Jaitly, N., 2015b. Pointer networks. In: Proceedings of NIPS,
pp. 2692 –2700.
Wale, N., Watson, I.A., Karypis, G., 2008. Comparison of descriptor spaces for chemical
compound retrieval and classi ﬁcation. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 14, 347 –375.
Wang, H., Leskovec, J., 2020. Unifying Graph Convolutional Neural Networks and Label
Propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06755 .
Wang, C., Pan, S., Long, G., Zhu, X., Jiang, J., 2017. Mgae: marginalized graph
autoencoder for graph clustering. In: Proceedings of CIKM, pp. 889 –898.
Wang, X., Girshick, R., Gupta, A., He, K., 2018a. Non-local neural networks. In:
Proceedings of CVPR, pp. 7794 –7803.
Wang, Z., Lv, Q., Lan, X., Zhang, Y., 2018b. Cross-lingual knowledge graph alignment via
graph convolutional networks. Proceedings of EMNLP 349 –357.
Wang, Z., Chen, T., Ren, J.S.J., Yu, W., Cheng, H., Lin, L., 2018c. Deep reasoning with
knowledge graph for social relationship understanding. Proceedings of IJCAI
1021–1028.
Wang, X., Ye, Y., Gupta, A., 2018d. Zero-shot recognition via semantic embeddings and
knowledge graphs. Proceedings of CVPR 6857 –6866.
Wang, Y., Sun, Y., Liu, Z., Sarma, S.E., Bronstein, M.M., Solomon, J.M., 2018e. Dynamic
Graph Cnn for Learning on Point Clouds. ACM Transactions on Graphics 38 .
Wang, X., Ji, H., Shi, C., Wang, B., Ye, Y., Cui, P., Yu, P.S., 2019a. Heterogeneous graph
attention network. In: Proceedings of WWW, pp. 2022 –2032.
Wang, M., Yu, L., Zheng, D., Gan, Q., Gai, Y., Ye, Z., Li, M., Zhou, J., Huang, Q., Ma, C.,
Huang, Z., Guo, Q., Zhang, H., Lin, H., Zhao, J., Li, J., Smola, A.J., Zhang, Z., 2019b.
Deep Graph Library: towards Ef ﬁcient and Scalable Deep Learning on Graphs, ICLR
Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds .
Watters, N., Zoran, D., Weber, T., Battaglia, P., Pascanu, R., Tacchetti, A., 2017. Visual
interaction networks: learning a physics simulator from video. In: Proceedings of
NIPS, pp. 4539 –4547.
Wu, Y., Lian, D., Xu, Y., Wu, L., Chen, E., 2020. Graph convolutional networks with
markov random ﬁeld reasoning for social spammer detection. In: Proceedings of
AAAI, 34, pp. 1054 –1061.
Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., Yu, P.S., 2019a. A Comprehensive Survey on
Graph Neural Networks arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00596 .
Wu, F., Souza Jr., A.H., Zhang, T., Fifty, C., Yu, T., Weinberger, K.Q., 2019b. Simplifying
graph convolutional networks. In: Volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, pp. 6861 –6871.
Wu, Q., Zhang, H., Gao, X., He, P., Weng, P., Gao, H., Chen, G., 2019c. Dual graph
attention networks for deep latent representation of multifaceted social effects in
recommender systems. In: Proceedings of WWW, pp. 2091 –2102.
Xu, K., Li, C., Tian, Y., Sonobe, T., Kawarabayashi, K., Jegelka, S., 2018. Representation
learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In: Proceeding of ICML,
pp. 5449 –5458.
Xu, B., Shen, H., Cao, Q., Qiu, Y., Cheng, X., 2019a. Graph wavelet neural network. In:
Proceedings of ICLR .
Xu, K., Hu, W., Leskovec, J., Jegelka, S., 2019b. How powerful are graph neural
networks?. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Xu, K., Wang, L., Yu, M., Feng, Y., Song, Y., Wang, Z., Yu, D., 2019c. Cross-lingual
knowledge graph alignment via graph matching neural network. In: Proceedings of
ACL. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3156 –3161.
Xu, N., Wang, P., Chen, L., Tao, J., Zhao, J., Gnn, M.R.-, 2019d. multi-resolution and dual
graph neural network for predicting structured entity interactions. In: Proceedings of
IJCAI, pp. 3968 –3974.
Yan, S., Xiong, Y., Lin, D., 2018. Spatial temporal graph convolutional networks for
skeleton-based action recognition. Proceedings of AAAI 32 .
Yang, C., Liu, Z., Zhao, D., Sun, M., Chang, E.Y., 2015. Network representation learning
with rich text information. In: Proceedings of IJCAI, pp. 2111 –2117.
Yang, Z., Cohen, W., Salakhudinov, R., 2016. Revisiting semi-supervised learning with
graph embeddings. In: Proceedings of ICML. PMLR, pp. 40 –48.
Yang, Y., Wei, Z., Chen, Q., Wu, L., 2019. Using external knowledge for ﬁnancial event
prediction based on graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of CIKM, pp. 2161 –2164.
Yang, C., Xiao, Y., Zhang, Y., Sun, Y., Han, J., 2020. Heterogeneous Network
Representation Learning: Survey, Benchmark, Evaluation, and beyond. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.00216.
Yao, L., Mao, C., Luo, Y., 2019. Graph convolutional networks for text classi ﬁcation.
Proceedings of AAAI 33, 7370 –7377.
Ying, R., He, R., Chen, K., Eksombatchai, P., Hamilton, W.L., Leskovec, J., 2018a. Graph
convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In: Proceedings
of KDD Update: 974-983 .
Ying, Z., You, J., Morris, C., Ren, X., Hamilton, W., Leskovec, J., 2018b. Hierarchical
graph representation learning with differentiable pooling. Proceedings of NeurIPS
4805–4815.
Ying, Z., Bourgeois, D., You, J., Zitnik, M., Leskovec, J., Gnnexplainer, 2019. Generating
explanations for graph neural networks. Proceedings of NeurIPS 9244 –9255.
You, J., Liu, B., Ying, Z., Pande, V., Leskovec, J., 2018a. Graph convolutional policy
network for goal-directed molecular graph generation. Proceedings of NeurIPS
6410–6421.
You, J., Ying, R., Ren, X., Hamilton, W., Leskovec, J., Graphrnn, 2018b. Generating
realistic graphs with deep auto-regressive models. Proceedings of ICML 5694 –5703.
You, J., Ying, Z., Leskovec, J., 2020. Design space for graph neural networks. In:
Proceedings of NeurIPS, 33 .
Yu, B., Yin, H., Zhu, Z., 2018. Spatio-temporal Graph Convolutional Networks: A Deep
Learning Framework for Traf ﬁc Forecasting. Proceedings of IJCAI, pp. 3634 –3640.
Yun, S., Jeong, M., Kim, R., Kang, J., Kim, H.J., 2019. Graph transformer networks. In:
Proceedings of NeurIPS, pp. 11983 –11993.
Zafarani, R., Liu, H., 2009. Social Computing Data Repository at ASU. http://soci
alcomputing.asu.edu.
Zaheer, M., Kottur, S., Ravanbakhsh, S., Poczos, B., Salakhutdinov, R.R., Smola, A.J.,
2017. Deep sets. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp. 3391 –3401.
Zang, C., Wang, F., 2020. Neural dynamics on complex networks. Proceedings of KDD,
pp. 892 –902.
Zayats, V., Ostendorf, M., 2018. Conversation modeling on reddit using a graph-
structured lstm. TACL 6, 121 –132.
Zeng, H., Zhou, H., Srivastava, A., Kannan, R., Prasanna, V.K., 2020. Graphsaint: graph
sampling based inductive learning method. In: Proceedings of ICLR .
Zhang, D., Yin, J., Zhu, X., Zhang, C., 2018a. Network Representation Learning: A Survey.
IEEE TBD 6 (1), 3 –28.
Zhang, Z., Cui, P., Zhu, W., 2018b. Deep Learning on Graphs: A Survey. IEEE TKDE .
Zhang, J., Shi, X., Xie, J., Ma, H., King, I., Yeung, D.-Y., 2018c. Gaan: gated attention
networks for learning on large and spatiotemporal graphs. In: Proceedings of UAI .
Zhang, Y., Liu, Q., Song, L., 2018d. Sentence-state lstm for text representation. In:
Proceedings of ACL, 1, pp. 317 –327.
Zhang, M., Cui, Z., Neumann, M., Chen, Y., 2018e. An end-to-end deep learning
architecture for graph classi ﬁcation. Proceedings of AAAI 32 .
Zhang, Y., Qi, P., Manning, C.D., 2018f. Graph convolution over pruned dependency trees
improves relation extraction. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp. 2205 –2215.
Zhang, S., Tong, H., Xu, J., Maciejewski, R., 2019a. Graph convolutional networks: a
comprehensive review. Computational Social Networks 6 (1), 1 –23.
Zhang, C., Song, D., Huang, C., Swami, A., Chawla, N.V., 2019b. Heterogeneous graph
neural network. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 793 –803.
Zhang, X., Liu, H., Li, Q., Wu, X., 2019c. Attributed graph clustering via adaptive graph
convolution. In: Proceedings of IJCAI, pp. 4327 –4333.
Zhang, F., Liu, X., Tang, J., Dong, Y., Yao, P., Zhang, J., Gu, X., Wang, Y., Shao, B., Li, R.,
et al., 2019d. Oag: toward linking large-scale heterogeneous entity graphs.
Proceedings of KDD 2585 –2595.
Zhang, J., Zhang, H., Sun, L., Xia, C., 2020. Graph-bert: only attention is needed for
learning graph representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.05140 .
Zheng, X., Dan, C., Aragam, B., Ravikumar, P., Xing, E., 2020a. Learning sparse
nonparametric dags. In: Proceedings of AISTATS. PMLR, pp. 3414 –3425.
Zheng, C., Fan, X., Wang, C., Qi, J., Gman, 2020b. A graph multi-attention network for
trafﬁc prediction. Proceedings of AAAI 34, 1234 –1241.
Zhong, W., Xu, J., Tang, D., Xu, Z., Duan, N., Zhou, M., Wang, J., Yin, J., 2020. Reasoning
over semantic-level graph for fact checking. Proceedings of ACL 6170 –6180.
Zhou, J., Han, X., Yang, C., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Li, C., Sun, M., 2019. Gear: graph-based
evidence aggregating and reasoning for fact veri ﬁcation. In: Proceedings of ACL,
pp. 892 –901.
Zhu, D., Zhang, Z., Cui, P., Zhu, W., 2019. Robust graph convolutional networks against
adversarial attacks. Proceedings of KDD 1399 –1407.
Zhu, R., Zhao, K., Yang, H., Lin, W., Zhou, C., Ai, B., Li, Y., Zhou, J., 2019a. Aligraph.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 12 (12), 2094 –2105.
Zhu, Z., Xu, S., Qu, M., Tang, J., 2019b. Graphvite: a high-performance cpu-gpu hybrid
system for node embedding. In: Proceddings of WWW. ACM, pp. 2494 –2504.
Zhuang, C., Ma, Q., 2018. Dual Graph Convolutional Networks for Graph-Based Semi-
supervised Classi ﬁcation. Proceedings of WWW, pp. 499 –508.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
80
Zilly, J.G., Srivastava, R.K., Koutnik, J., Schmidhuber, J., 2016. Recurrent highway
networks. In: Proceedings of ICML, pp. 4189 –4198.
Zitnik, M., Leskovec, J., 2017. Predicting multicellular function through multi-layer tissue
networks. Bioinformatics 33, i190 –i198.
Zitnik, M., Agrawal, M., Leskovec, J., 2018. Modeling polypharmacy side effects with
graph convolutional networks. Bioinformatics 34, i457 –i466.
Zou, D., Hu, Z., Wang, Y., Jiang, S., Sun, Y., Gu, Q., 2019. Layer-dependent importance
sampling for training deep and large graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings
of NeurIPS, pp. 11249 –11259.
Zügner, D., Akbarnejad, A., Günnemann, S., 2018. Adversarial attacks on neural networks
for graph data. In: Proceedings of KDD, pp. 2847 –2856.
E. Rossi, F. Frasca, B. Chamberlain, D. Eynard, M. Bronstein, F. Monti, 2020. Sign:
scalable inception graph neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11198.
J. Zhou et al. AI Open 1 (2020) 57 –81
81

