Quantum mechanical closure of partial differential equations with symmetries
Chris Valesa,∗, David C. Freemana, Joanna Slawinskaa, Dimitrios Giannakisa
aDepartment of Mathematics, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA
Abstract
We develop a statistical framework for the dynamical closure of spatiotemporal dynamics governed by partial
differential equations. Employing the mathematical framework of quantum mechanics to embed the original
classical dynamics into a quantum mechanical representation, we use the space of quantum density operators
to model the unresolved degrees of freedom of the original dynamics in a statistical sense, and the framework
of quantum measurement to predict their contributions to the resolved dynamics. The embedded dynamics
is discretized by a positivity preserving process, leading to a compressed representation that is invariant
under the dynamical symmetries of the resolved dynamics. We present a data based formulation of the
closure scheme and apply it to a closure problem for the shallow water equations. The numerical results
demonstrate that our closure model can accurately predict the main features of the true dynamics, including
for out of sample initial conditions.
Keywords:
dynamical closure, parametrization, quantum mechanics, kernel methods, delay embedding,
transfer operator, shallow water equations
1. Introduction
Complex dynamical systems often encompass degrees of freedom that evolve over a wide range of temporal
and spatial scales, with their evolution potentially depending on different physical regimes. A challenging
problem in such multiscale, multiphysics systems is incorporating dynamical information for degrees of
freedom that either are too computationally expensive to simulate directly, or depend on fully or partially
unknown physical processes [1–3].
The approach employed by closure or parametrization methods is to derive surrogate dynamical models
that can be used to approximate the contributions of fine grain degrees of freedom to the dynamics of
coarse grain processes we can simulate consistently. Early applications included turbulent flows and climate
modeling [1, 4, 5], but closure methods have since found consequential applications in a wide range of fields
[6]. For example, in atmospheric dynamics a technique known as super-parametrization employs column
models with explicitly resolved cloud microphysics as surrogate models of small scale moist convection,
embedded within the discretization cells of a coarse atmospheric model [7, 8]. In plasma dynamics there are
ongoing efforts to derive models for subgrid scale processes in fluid models, as well as to derive fluid closures
of kinetic models, incorporating both physical modeling and data based approaches [9–12].
In this work we focus on the development of a statistical, data based framework for the closure of
dynamics governed by partial differential equations (PDEs).
More specifically, we employ the operator
theoretic framework of quantum mechanics to define surrogate dynamical models, using quantum density
operators to encode statistical information about fine grain degrees of freedom and quantum observables to
model their contributions to the coarse dynamics. Our approach extends a previously developed quantum
mechanical closure (QMCl) framework [13] to the closure of spatiotemporal dynamics, explicitly taking
∗Corresponding author.
Email addresses: chris.vales@dartmouth.edu (Chris Vales), david.c.freeman.gr@dartmouth.edu (David C. Freeman),
joanna.m.slawinska@dartmouth.edu (Joanna Slawinska), dimitrios.giannakis@dartmouth.edu (Dimitrios Giannakis)
arXiv:2505.07519v3  [math.DS]  16 Mar 2026
into account the presence of dynamical symmetries to improve the numerical efficiency and training data
requirements of our surrogate models [14].
In the rest of Section 1 we briefly discuss the problem of dynamical closure and different modeling
approaches toward addressing it, present the main aspects of our proposed closure scheme and summarize
the main results of this work. In Section 2 we develop in detail the different aspects of our closure framework.
In Section 3 we present an application to a closure problem for the shallow water equations, followed by a brief
conclusion in Section 4. Finally, Appendix A provides additional details on the numerical implementation
of our closure scheme. The code used to generate the numerical results and plots of this work is available
online1.
1.1. Dynamical closure
We consider a dynamical system Φt : X →X, t ≥0 on a state space X. The flow map Φt represents the
spatiotemporal dynamics governed by a PDE on a bounded spatial domain S. As such, the state space X
is a Hilbert space of functions on the considered spatial domain. To define the general dynamical closure
problem, we decompose the state space as X = Xr ⊕Xu, with Xr denoting the state space of the resolved
degrees of freedom of the dynamics and Xu the state space of the unresolved degrees. The flow map of
the original dynamics Φt can then also be decomposed into the resolved dynamics Φt
r : X →Xr and the
unresolved dynamics Φt
u : X →Xu.
To provide an illustrative example of this decomposition we consider the advection equation with periodic
boundary conditions
∂tu + c∂xu = F(u)
(1)
where u denotes a function of time t ≥0 and space x ∈S ⊂R, F a nonlinear function of u, and c ∈R the
advection velocity. We define the spatially averaged state function
ˆu(·, x) = 1
ℓ
Z x+ℓ/2
x−ℓ/2
u(·, y)dy
where ℓ> 0 denotes the length of the averaging window. The evolution equation for ˆu is derived by spatially
averaging (1) to obtain
∂tˆu + c∂xˆu = F(ˆu) + G(ˆu, u)
(2)
with residual term
G(ˆu, u)(·, x) = 1
ℓ
Z x+ℓ/2
x−ℓ/2
F(u)(·, y)dy −F(ˆu)(·, x).
(3)
A version of this type of spatial averaging on a discretized spatial domain will be used for our numerical
application in Section 3.
We consider the original PDE (1) as the equation generating the true dynamics Φt with u ∈X as the
state variable. Motivating the decomposition described above, we take the spatially averaged equation (2) as
the equation governing the resolved dynamics, meaning that ˆu is the resolved state variable with state space
Xr and Φt
r the flow map governing its evolution. The associated unresolved state space Xu is then implicitly
defined as the orthogonal complement of Xr in X, representing phenomena that cannot be resolved by ˆu.
Due to the nonlinear term F(u) in the original PDE, the spatial averaging operation has not eliminated
the dependence of (2) on the unresolved degrees of freedom. This is clearly demonstrated by the presence
of the residual terms (3), which retain their dependence on the original state variable u. As a result, the
resolved dynamics map Φr generated by (2) requires at least partial knowledge of unresolved variables at any
given time. This is a manifestation of the dynamical closure problem: to form a closed system of evolution
for the resolved degrees of freedom, we need knowledge of additional, unresolved variables. The residual
terms (3) still depending on the unresolved degrees of freedom are often referred to as the flux terms or
fluxes.
1https://github.com/cval26/qmcl_swe
2
To address this problem, closure or parametrization methods construct a surrogate model for the resolved
degrees of freedom, which approximates the evaluation of the fluxes by modeling the unresolved variables
appropriately.
The surrogate models formed for the resolved and unresolved variables can then evolve
in parallel, leading to a closed system of evolution for the resolved variables.
To be useful, the model
employed for the unresolved variables has to be computationally efficient and lead to surrogate dynamics
that constitutes an effective and consistent approximation of the original dynamics in an appropriate sense.
Closure problems in physics also arise when deriving a fluid model from a kinetic description of a system
by considering the evolution of moments of the phase space probability density function [15]. In that setting,
the resolved variables are the low order velocity moments involved in the fluid description—usually mass,
momentum and energy—while the unresolved variables are the ignored higher order moments. To define
a closed system of evolution for the fluid model, one is again tasked with forming a surrogate model to
estimate the required fluxes.
1.2. Modeling approaches
One approach toward defining a surrogate model is to model the unresolved variables by a deterministic
function of the resolved variables. Defining such a function can be achieved by both physical modeling and
data based approaches [3, 16–19]. A drawback of this approach is that it corresponds to a reduction in the
dimension of the full state space of the dynamics, thereby potentially reducing the overall complexity that
can be produced by the surrogate model [20].
Our work is motivated by an alternative, statistical approach, where the state space of the unresolved
degrees of freedom is replaced by the space of probability density functions on the full state space of the
dynamics [21–23]. More specifically, a probability density function is used to assign a probability that the
dynamical system is in a given state at a given time. Contrary to purely functional approaches, where a
single state of the system is uniquely identified for any given time, statistical methods take into consideration
the presence of uncertainty in our knowledge of the full state of the dynamical system.
To illustrate the main features of this approach we define a probability density function p ∈L1(X) on the
state space. This is a real valued, nonnegative function whose integral over X is equal to one with respect
to an appropriate measure. At any given time, the evaluation of the density function p(u) ≥0 assigns a
probability that the dynamical system is currently in state u ∈X. Equipped with statistical knowledge of
the current state of the dynamics, one can use it to compute the fluxes required for the evolution of the
resolved variables. To that end, the fluxes are modeled by a bounded, real valued function f ∈L∞(X)
called an observable; namely, given a state u ∈X, the associated flux is f(u) ∈R. The required flux can
then be estimated by the expected value of f with respect to p, namely
R
X f(u)p(u)du ∈R with respect to
an appropriate measure.
Having estimated the required flux term, one can then proceed with the evolution of the resolved variables;
in our motivating example, this corresponds to integrating in time the spatially averaged PDE. For the
surrogate evolution system to be closed, it must also account for the time evolution of the surrogate model
of the unresolved variables, namely the density function p. This can be accomplished by using the transfer or
Perron-Frobenius operator, which governs the evolution of probability density functions under the dynamics
[24]. These notions will be made precise in the following sections.
As explained in the following section, one of the main features differentiating our closure framework from
the general statistical framework sketched above is that we replace the probability density function p with a
probability density operator. Namely, the nonnegative function p with unit integral is replaced by a positive
semidefinite operator with unit trace. Accordingly, the bounded function f modeling the fluxes is replaced
by a bounded operator. In our framework, the estimated flux is then given by the expected value of the
observable operator with respect to the probability density operator.
1.3. Quantum mechanical closure framework
We provide a brief overview of the QMCl framework as it has been developed in [13] for the closure of
dynamics governed by ordinary differential equations. A detailed treatment of the framework will be given
in Section 2, where we extend it to the closure of dynamics governed by PDEs.
3
As already mentioned earlier, we adopt a statistical description of the unresolved dynamics, meaning that
we model the evolution of a probability density function of the state vectors, rather than the evolution of the
state vectors themselves. One of the main features of the QMCl framework is that this statistical description
is embedded into the operator setting of quantum mechanics on a complex Hilbert space H = L2(X, µ),
where X denotes the state space and µ an invariant probability measure of the original dynamics. This
involves embedding observables and probability densities, as well as the evolution of said densities under the
dynamics and their bayesian conditioning.
In the classical statistical description, a probability density function p ∈L1(X, µ) was used to model
the state of the unresolved degrees of freedom.
Given that √p ∈H, we now map function p to the
quantum density operator ρ ∈B(H), ρ = ⟨√p, ·⟩√p, representing a pure quantum state. Quantum density
operators—also called quantum states—are positive semidefinite, selfadjoint operators in B(H) with unit
trace, and can be thought of as the operator analog of probability density functions. In this work we mainly
use pure quantum states, which are rank-one quantum density operators equivalent to projections along a
unit vector [25, 26]. The statistical description of the dynamics obtained by mapping the density function p
to the density operator ρ is an example of the Koopman-von Neumann representation of classical dynamics
[27–29].
The fluxes needed for the closure of the resolved dynamics were modeled classically by an observable
f ∈L∞(X, µ) ⊂H. This is now mapped to a selfadjoint multiplication operator A ∈B(H), Ag = fg for
all g ∈H, which is referred to as a quantum observable. With these definitions in place, the surrogate flux
needed for the evolution of the resolved dynamics is defined as the expected value of A with respect to ρ,
namely EρA = tr(ρA) ∈R, which is connected to the theory of quantum measurement. In other words, we
use the space of quantum density operators to model the unresolved degrees of freedom of the dynamics and
the framework of quantum measurement to estimate their fluxes.
In addition to evaluating the required flux terms, we need to be able to evolve the density operator ρ
under the system’s dynamics and condition it based on observed dynamical behavior. In the classical case,
the square root of the probability density function √p evolved according to the transfer or Perron-Frobenius
operator P : H →H, P√p = √p ◦Φ−1. Accordingly, the evolution of the density operator ρ is governed by
the induced transfer operator P : B(H) →B(H), acting by conjugation Pρ = PρP −1.
In analogy to the bayesian conditioning of the probability density function p, we can condition the density
operator ρ using a quantum effect operator e ∈B(H)
ρ|e =
√eρ√e
Eρe
(4)
where √e denotes the positive square root of e. The above equation can be interpreted as the operator
analog of the classical Bayes rule [30]. In addition, the quantum effect operator e can be thought of as the
operator analog of an indicator function, which is used in classical probability to represent an event, namely
a set in the event space. For instance, for a given set F ⊂X we can build the indicator function 1F ∈H
taking the value one on F and zero elsewhere. The quantum effect operator eF ∈B(H) can then be defined
as multiplication by 1F , namely eF g = 1F g for all g ∈H.
The following diagram depicts the evolution for one timestep of the QMCl closure model built using the
tools developed in the previous paragraphs. The top row of the diagram is concerned with the resolved
degrees of freedom ˆu ∈Xr, while the bottom row with the density operator ρ acting as our surrogate model
for the unresolved degrees of freedom. In the diagram, subscripts are used to denote the time index, while
Id denotes the identity map.
ˆun
ˆun+1
ˆun+1
ρn
ρ′
n+1
ρn+1
resolved
Id
effect
flux
transfer
Bayes
(5)
To evolve the resolved variables for one timestep, we require knowledge of the flux term depending on the
unresolved degrees of freedom. As explained above, this is estimated by the expected value of an observable
4
A with respect to the density ρn. The evolution of the density operator ρn consists of two steps, a prediction
step and a correction step. The prediction step employs the transfer operator to update the density operator
ρn, yielding the prior density ρ′
n+1. The correction step relies on the quantum Bayes formula (4) to correct
this prediction, yielding the posterior density ρn+1. The bayesian correction uses information extracted
from the updated resolved variables ˆun+1, in the form of a quantum effect, to condition the prior density,
concluding one timestep of the evolution of the density operator.
1.4. Main results
We offer a preliminary description of the way QMCl is extended to the closure of dynamics governed
by PDEs. As explained in Section 1.1, in the setting of spatiotemporal dynamics the resolved state ˆu is
a spatially averaged function on the spatial domain S. Motivated by this, the main point of departure of
the extended QMCl framework from the one outlined above is that we use a field of density operators ρ(x)
to model the unresolved degrees of freedom at each point x, instead of using one density operator for the
whole domain. This enables us to compute surrogate fluxes that vary over the spatial domain, and are thus
capable of modeling the true flux terms (3) introduced earlier. Schematically, this means that the extended
QMCl scheme involves one copy of diagram (5) for each gridpoint x, with the diagrams evolving in parallel.
The main features of the present work can be summarized as follows.
1. Positivity preservation. Using probability density operators to encode statistical information about
the original dynamics leads to a closure scheme that is positivity preserving, which is important for
sign definite quantities. More specifically, positive flux terms in the original dynamics are represented
by positive definite operators, in turn leading to positive surrogate flux terms in our scheme’s imple-
mentation (Section 2.5).
2. Symmetry factorization. We incorporate elements of the vector valued spectral analysis (VSA) frame-
work [14] to develop a data based formulation of our scheme that is efficient and effective in the
presence of dynamical symmetries. More specifically, our scheme rests on a compressed approximate
representation of the original dynamics that is invariant with respect to the dynamical symmetries of
the resolved dynamics (Section 2.4).
3. Computational efficiency. The numerical implementation of our closure scheme requires solving an
eigenvalue problem for a kernel matrix, which is one of the most expensive tasks of the scheme (Section
2.5). To address that we compute a low rank approximation of the original kernel matrix and use it
to solve the eigenvalue problem with reduced cost [31].
4. Application. We apply our scheme to a closure problem for the shallow water equations on a one
dimensional spatial domain (Section 3). The results demonstrate that the derived surrogate model
can effectively capture and reproduce the main features of the dynamics, including for out of sample
initial conditions. The numerical results can be reproduced using the provided code2.
We end this section by offering a partial answer to the question: why formulate a statistical closure
framework using the operator setting of quantum mechanics, instead of the original function setting of
classical mechanics? First, working in an operator setting leads to an implementation of our closure scheme
that is naturally positivity preserving, meaning that the required discretization of classical observables and
probability density functions preserves their positivity (Section 2.5). Second, the use of density operators
to encode statistical information about the unresolved degrees of freedom offers a potential increase in the
available encoding capacity, compared to using density functions (Section 3.4). However, these benefits
are accompanied by an increase in computation and memory cost, since most discretized quantities are now
represented by matrices instead of vectors (Section 2.5). Finally, the fact that our closure scheme rests on the
mathematical framework of quantum mechanics offers the opportunity to explore its future implementation
in quantum computers, especially in order to investigate whether a more efficient implementation can be
devised by doing so.
2https://github.com/cval26/qmcl_swe
5
2. Closure of partial differential equations
In this section we develop the extended QMCl closure scheme and its data based formulation.
We
begin by setting up the problem in Section 2.1, before presenting the main aspects of our closure modeling
framework in Section 2.2. As explained in Section 2.2, the extended QMCl scheme is formulated in an infinite
dimensional Hilbert space H. In Section 2.3 we construct a finite dimensional subspace of H, which will be
used in the numerical implementation of our scheme. Section 2.4 then investigates some of the properties
of the constructed subspace with respect to dynamical symmetries. Finally, Sections 2.5 and 2.6 deal with
the data based formulation of the extended QMCl scheme that will be used for our numerical experiments.
2.1. Problem setting
Expanding on the preliminary material presented in Section 1.1, we consider the spatiotemporal dynamics
Φn : X →X, n ∈N, possessing an invariant probability measure µ. The discrete time map Φn is assumed to
be a discrete time version of the continuous time dynamics, with Φn = Φn∆t for a timestep ∆t > 0. Based
on the guiding example of the advection equation given in Section 1.1, the dynamics map Φn is generated
by the temporally discretized version of (2), corresponding to the spatially averaged dynamics.
The state space X of the dynamics is a Hilbert space of functions on a bounded spatial domain S ⊂Rc,
c ∈N. Specifically, we assume X ⊂L2(S, ν; Rd), d ∈N, with ν denoting the Lebesgue measure. We consider
the state space decomposition X = Xr ⊕Xu into the resolved and unresolved state spaces. Based on (1)–(2),
the resolved state space is associated with spatially averaged or coarsened functions, which were denoted by
ˆu in Section 1.1. Analogously, the unresolved state space Xu = X⊥
r is defined as the orthogonal complement,
representing degrees of freedom that cannot be resolved by the coarse state ˆu.
Introducing the product state space Ω= X × S and product measure σ = µ × ν, we define the Hilbert
space of spatiotemporal observables H = L2(Ω, σ; C). Given a real valued observable f ∈H, for almost
every u ∈X we have that f(u, ·) ∈L2(S, ν; R) yields a real valued function on the spatial domain S, with
f(u, x) ∈R its value at x ∈S. The motivation for our choice of space H is our interest in spatiotemporal
observables; that is, patterns of evolution that have both a temporal dependence through u ∈X and a
spatial dependence through x ∈S. An example of such an observable is the flux function introduced in
(3); given a state u ∈X and gridpoint x ∈S, it outputs the residual term required for the local closure of
the coarse dynamics (2). Moving forward, the range space of a function space is assumed to be C unless
explicitly noted otherwise, and the measure notation is dropped when clear from the context; for example,
we write L2(X) instead of L2(X, µ; C).
The fact that we employ an invariant measure µ means that the dynamics Φn is volume preserving—also
called incompressible—when the state space “volume” is measured with µ. This means that µ(Φ−n(F)) =
µ(F) for every measurable set F ⊆X and n ∈N. For instance, there are dissipative nonlinear PDEs which,
although not volume preserving with respect to the ambient Lebesgue measure, can be shown to possess
an invariant measure related to their dynamics on an attractor [32, 33].
The existence of an invariant
probability measure for compact X and continuous Φn is ensured by the Krylov-Bogoliubov theorem [24],
which is sufficient for the applications considered in the present work.
In the data based formulation of our scheme treated in Sections 2.5, 2.6 and 3, we use dynamical
trajectories to collect state space samples as our training data.
The process of sampling the dynamics
along a trajectory can be naturally interpreted as sampling an invariant measure µ, since it is the dynamics
that dictates the statistical distribution of the sampled points in the state space. This may be contrasted
to sampling the dynamics on a predefined cartesian grid in the state space, which would correspond to
sampling the ambient Lebesgue measure.
2.2. Closure model
The flux terms needed for the closure of the resolved dynamics are represented by d classical real valued
observables fj ∈L∞(Ω) ⊂H, j ∈{0, . . . , d −1}. Following the approach outlined in Section 1.3, each
observable fj is mapped to a bounded, selfadjoint multiplication operator Aj ∈B(H), which we refer to as
a quantum observable.
6
As mentioned earlier, an example of such an observable is the flux function (3), which generates the
residual terms needed for the integration of the coarse dynamics (2). Given that the advection equation (1)
models the evolution of the scalar field u, it follows that d = 1 and thus only one observable is needed to
model the fluxes. In Section 3 we are going to consider a closure problem for the shallow water equations
(14), a system of PDEs for two scalar fields (height and momentum). As a result, in that case d = 2 and
thus two observables will be used to generate the needed fluxes.
To model the unresolved degrees of freedom we employ a field of quantum density operators ρ: S →B(H)
over the discretized spatial domain S. Each density operator ρ(x) ∈B(H) represents the unresolved degrees
of freedom of the dynamics at a point x ∈S in a statistical sense. It is defined as the rank-one projection
along the square root of a probability density function px ∈L1(Ω), ρ(x) = ⟨√px, ·⟩√px.
Using a field
of density operators allows us to compute fluxes that vary over the spatial domain S for each quantum
observable Aj. More specifically, we define the corresponding d surrogate flux functions ˜fj : S →R with
action
˜fj(x) = tr(ρ(x)Aj) ∈R
(6)
yielding d surrogate flux terms at each gridpoint.
For the closure of the coarse advection dynamics (2), one density operator ρ(x) is required for each
gridpoint x of the spatial domain. Using equation (6) with the single quantum observable modeling the
flux terms (3), we can generate one surrogate flux at each gridpoint x for each timestep, thus creating a
surrogate evolution equation for the coarse dynamics.
The time evolution of each density operator ρ(x) is performed by conjugation with the transfer operator
P : H →H, P√px (u, ·) = √px (Φ−1(u), ·), yielding ρn+1(x) = Pρn(x)P −1, where superscripts denote the
time index. Finally, the bayesian conditioning of each density operator ρ(x) is performed using a quantum
effect operator ex ∈B(H) and the quantum Bayes rule (4) introduced in Section 1.3. The way the quantum
effects ex ∈B(H) are computed in practice will be explained in Section 2.5.
2.3. Finite dimensional projection
As explained above, our extended closure model is formed in the infinite dimensional Hilbert space of
observables H. In this section we form a finite dimensional subspace HL ⊂H by constructing a collection
of orthonormal basis functions that span HL.
To construct a finite dimensional subspace of H we use the orthonormal basis generated by the eigen-
functions of a positive definite, selfadjoint kernel integral operator K : H →H
Kf =
Z
Ω
κ(·, ω)f(ω)dσ(ω)
(7)
with a positive definite, symmetric and uniformly continuous kernel function κ ∈Cb(Ω× Ω) ∩L2(Ω× Ω).
By forming an operator acting directly on the product Hilbert space H we obtain eigenfunctions that
are generally not of separable, tensor product form.
This is in contrast to traditional approaches such
as the proper orthogonal decomposition, where one would build a basis for L2(X) (the temporal space
in this context) and form its tensor product with a basis for the spatial space L2(S) to form a basis for
H ≃L2(X) ⊗L2(S). As explained below, in the presence of dynamical symmetries our approach leads to a
more compressed finite dimensional representation of the dynamics on H, meaning that each eigenfunction
of operator K as defined above can represent spatiotemporal patterns that are not expressible as a product
of a single pair of temporal and spatial modes [14].
The kernel function κ(ω, ω′) = k(WQ(ω), WQ(ω′)) is formed by composing a gaussian kernel function
k: RdQ × RdQ →R and a time delay embedding map WQ : Ω→RdQ, where Q ∈N denotes the number of
time delays. More specifically, the map WQ acts by
WQ((u, x)) =
 projr(u)(x), projr(Φ−1(u))(x), . . . , projr(Φ−(Q−1)(u))(x)

(8)
which corresponds to pointwise time delay embedding of the product state sample ω = (u, x). Note that WQ
considers only the resolved component of state vector u ∈X by using the projection operator projr : X →Xr.
7
This is because in many practical situations one has access to data only for the resolved variables, not the
full state of the system. The gaussian kernel then acts by
k(WQ(ω), WQ(ω′)) = exp

−1
ϵQ∥WQ(ω) −WQ(ω′)∥2
(9)
where ∥·∥denotes the euclidean norm in RdQ and ϵ > 0 is a tunable bandwidth parameter. The bandwidth
parameter ϵ can be calibrated using the procedure developed in [34]. In our numerical experiments we
normalize the above kernel to turn it into a bistochastic kernel.
The bistochastic kernel normalization
process and motivation for using it can be found in [35, 36].
The eigenfunctions of operator K from (7) form an orthonormal basis for its range ran K ⊂H. We use
its L ∈N leading eigenfunctions {ϕℓ}L−1
ℓ=0 to define the finite dimensional subspace HL ⊂H as their linear
span. Next, the density operators and observables introduced in Section 2.2 are projected from B(H) to
B(HL), which can be represented by L×L matrices with respect to our basis. This process will be presented
in Section 2.5 along with the data based formulation of our closure scheme.
In the next section we describe some of the properties of the subspace ran K ⊂H obtained through the
eigendecomposition of K as they relate to dynamical symmetries.
2.4. Dynamical symmetries
We build the finite dimensional subspace HL via the eigenfunctions of the kernel integral operator K,
using a kernel function that acts by time delay embedding each state vector u at a fixed gridpoint x. This
choice of kernel function is motivated by the VSA framework developed in [14], where the following material
is presented in more detail.
We are particularly interested in PDEs with dynamical symmetries, which often arise from symmetries
on the spatial domain such as spatial translations or rotations. We stress that our closure framework does
not require the presence of dynamical symmetries. However, when symmetries are present, then our choice
of kernel function exhibits some favorable properties.
We consider a symmetry group G acting on the spatial domain S by a continuous left action Γg, which
preserves the measure ν for all g ∈G. In particular, G is the group of dynamical symmetries associated
with the resolved dynamics Φn
r , and is generally a subgroup of the group of symmetries associated with the
true dynamics Φn. This is because some of the original symmetries may be lost when deriving the resolved
dynamics by spatial averaging or coarsening.
The actions Γg induce the associated actions ΓX,g(u) = u ◦Γ−1
g
on the state space X. Assuming that
Xr is invariant under Γg, they also induce the corresponding actions Γr,g(ˆu) = ˆu ◦Γ−1
g
on the resolved state
space Xr. The induced actions represent dynamical symmetries of the resolved dynamics Φn
r , which means
that they satisfy the equivariance property
Φn
r ◦ΓX,g = Γr,g ◦Φn
r
(10)
for all n ∈N and g ∈G. In addition, we assume that the resolved dynamics is derived in such a way that the
true flux functions fj ∈H satisfy the analogous equivariance property fj(ΓX,g(u), x) = fj(u, Γg(x)) for all
x ∈S, u ∈X, g ∈G and j ∈{0, . . . , d −1}. As explained below, our choice of kernel naturally exploits the
equivariance property (10) to bestow an analogous invariance property on the eigenfunctions of the kernel
integral operator.
As an example, the dynamics generated by the advection equation (1) with periodic boundary conditions
is equivariant under the continuous group of spatial translations. The translation symmetry is preserved
during the spatial averaging employed to derive the averaged equation (2). As a result, in this case both the
true and the resolved (averaged) dynamics satisfy the same group of dynamical symmetries. Furthermore,
in Section 3 we will consider the shallow water equations (14) with periodic boundary conditions, which are
also equivariant under spatial translations. More specifically, we will consider the discretized equations on
a fine grid as the true dynamics, and an averaged version on a coarse grid as the resolved dynamics. In that
case, the true dynamics will be equivariant under the discrete group of translations associated with the fine
8
grid. However, the symmetries of the resolved dynamics will be a subgroup of that group, containing only
the spatial translations on the coarser grid.
Under the action of map WQ from (8), the product space Ωis factored into a space of equivalence classes
[ω]Q ⊂Ω, ω ∈Ω, with each class defined as the subset of Ωon which WQ is constant. Namely, a product
state ω′ is a member of [ω]Q if and only if WQ(ω) = WQ(ω′). For our choice of map WQ, each equivalence
class consists of the points in Ωwhose resolved dynamical evolution over Q delays is identical. From the
equivariance property (10) it follows that, for any ω ∈Ω, the set of all symmetry transformations of ω under
G is a subset of its equivalence class [ω]Q. This is because any product state vectors that differ only by a
symmetry transformation will demonstrate the same evolution under the resolved dynamics Φn
r , by virtue
of (10).
Because the kernel function κ in (7) acts by composition with the delay embedding map WQ, it follows
that κ is constant on the [·]Q equivalence classes by construction. As a result, every function f ∈ran K is
constant on the equivalence classes; namely, f(ω′) = f(ω) for all ω′ ∈[ω]Q. Since each equivalence class
[ω]Q contains all symmetry transformations of ω under G, it follows that functions f ∈ran K satisfy the
invariance property
f ◦ΓΩ,g = f
(11)
for all g ∈G, with ΓΩ,g = ΓX,g ⊗Γg the induced group action on Ω.
In particular, this implies that
the eigenfunctions of the integral operator K satisfy this property as well. Combined with the fact that
all f ∈ran K are continuous by the uniform continuity of κ, we conclude that ran K consists entirely of
continuous functions that are constant on the equivalence classes [·]Q.
As a result of (11), by using the eigenfunctions of K we derive a basis of ran K that is invariant under
the actions of G, instead of getting multiple “copies” of the same underlying functions generated by the
action of different g ∈G. Most importantly for our purposes, this means that fewer eigenfunctions are
needed to represent complex spatiotemporal dynamics, thereby producing a more efficient compression of
the dynamics from H to subspace HL.
2.5. Data based formulation
In this section we consider the data based formulation of the extended QMCl scheme developed in the
previous sections, using a single dynamical trajectory to generate our training data. In the next section we
extend this construction to the case of training data consisting of multiple trajectories.
In the theoretical formulation of QMCl developed above, the state space X is generally an infinite
dimensional Hilbert space of functions on the spatial domain S, with the dynamics map Φn generated by
a PDE. To be able to simulate the “true” dynamics numerically, we approximate the true dynamics by a
discretization of the original PDE associated with a discretized spatial domain SM ⊂S, where M ∈N
denotes the number of gridpoints. In what follows, we denote by νM a restriction of the Lebesgue measure
ν to a σ-algebra of sets generated by the discretization cells of the spatial domain SM.
With respect to our motivating example of the advection PDE (1), the above corresponds to considering
the true discrete time dynamics Φn as being generated by a high fidelity discretized version of (1). The
resolved dynamics and associated resolved state space are again defined by forming a spatially averaged
version of the discretized true dynamics. A detailed description of this construction will be presented in
Section 3, where we consider an application of QMCl to the shallow water equations.
We consider a finite dynamical trajectory of N ∈N samples XN = {un}N−1
n=0 ⊂X with un = Φn(u0),
u0 ∈X, and the associated sampling measure µN = PN−1
n=0 δun/N. The space of observables is defined as
the NM-dimensional Hilbert space HN = L2(Ω, σN) with product measure σN = µN × νM. To construct
our closure model we require access to the resolved state samples ˆun = projr(un) ∈Xr and associated
flux samples fj(un, ·) ∈L2(S, νm), j ∈{0, . . . , d −1}. We denote the product state samples by ωnm =
(un, xm) ∈ΩNM with un ∈XN and xm ∈SM.
We operate under the assumption that the sampling
measures µN converge weakly to the invariant measure µ, in the sense that limN→∞
R
X f dµN =
R
X f dµ
for all f ∈Cb(X) [13].
9
In the discrete setting the kernel integral operator KN : HN →HN corresponding to (7) is defined as
KNf =
Z
Ω
k(WQ(·), WQ(ω))f(ω)dσN(ω) =
1
NM
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
k(WQ(·), WQ(ωnm))f(ωnm).
(12)
Using the L leading eigenfunctions {ϕℓ}L−1
ℓ=0 of KN we construct the L-dimensional subspace HL
N ⊂HN
as their linear span. Computing the eigenfunctions of KN with a direct method has a computational cost
that scales with (NM)3, making the computation prohibitively expensive as NM grows.
To make the
computation more tractable, in our numerical experiments we build a low rank approximation of the kernel
matrix KN associated with KN and use it to compute its eigenfunctions with reduced cost (Section 3.3).
In what follows, we make use of the orthogonal projection projL : HN →HL
N ⊂HN to project an operator
A ∈B(HN) to projL A projL ∈B(HL
N), which can then be represented by an L × L matrix of coefficients
with respect to our basis.
Each flux function fj ∈HN corresponds to a vector in RNM with entries fj(un, xm), where un ∈XN and
xm ∈SM. Every such function is used to define a multiplication operator ˜Aj ∈B(HN) and, after orthogonal
projection, form a quantum observable Aj ∈B(HL
N), which is generally no longer a multiplication operator.
Using our orthonormal basis, each Aj is represented by an L×L matrix Aj with entries Aj,ik = ⟨ϕi, ˜Ajϕk⟩N.
The discretization process employed by QMCl to generate the observables Aj is positivity preserving.
This means that if fj is a sign definite function (positive or negative), then so will be the resulting observable
Aj, producing surrogate fluxes that agree in sign with the true fluxes. This is one of the main benefits of
mapping classical observables and density functions to their associated operators before discretizing them
with respect to our basis. This is in contrast to discretizing the functions directly, which does not guarantee
the preservation of their positivity, potentially leading to surrogate fluxes that differ in sign from the true
ones. Of course, this benefit is accompanied by an increase in computational cost, since every observable is
represented by a matrix of coefficients with respect to our basis, instead of a vector of coefficients.
To model the unresolved degrees of freedom we form a field of quantum density operators ρ: SM →
B(HL
N), consisting of one density operator ρm = ρ(xm) ∈B(HL
N) for each gridpoint xm ∈SM. Each density
operator ρm is constructed as the projection along a real valued function hm ∈HL
N, ρm = ⟨hm, ·⟩Nhm.
Taking advantage of its rank-one structure, each ρm is represented by the coefficient vector ρm ∈RL with
entries ρm,ℓ= ⟨ϕℓ, hm⟩N.
Having formed the quantum observables and density operators, we are now in a position to formulate
the calculation of the required surrogate fluxes. For each j ∈{0, . . . , d −1} we define the surrogate flux
function ˜fj : SM →R, which uses the quantum observable Aj and field of density operators ρ to produce
the surrogate fluxes ˜fj(xm) = tr(ρ(xm)Aj) ∈R at each gridpoint xm ∈SM. Using our basis representation
this corresponds to ˜fj(xm) = ρ⊤
mAjρm.
The time evolution of the quantum density operators under the dynamics is carried out using the pro-
jected transfer operator P L
N : B(HL
N) →B(HL
N).
To build P L
N we begin by defining the shift operator
PN : HN →HN
PNf(ˆun, xm) =
(
0
if n = 0
f(ˆun−1, xm)
if 1 ≤n < N.
After orthogonal projection we obtain P L
N and its L × L coefficients matrix P L
N. Given a quantum density
operator ρn(xm) at time tn with vector representation ρn we obtain the updated state ρn+1 by
ρn+1 =
P L
N ρn
∥P L
N ρn∥2
where the renormalization is performed because the matrix P L
N is generally not orthogonal.
Finally, we arrive at the bayesian conditioning of quantum density operators. Each density operator
ρm is conditioned by a quantum effect operator em ∈B(HL
N) formed based on a given product state
vector ωm = (u, xm).
To build em from ωm we use the conditioning kernel function κc : Ω× Ω→R,
10
κc(ω, ω′) = kc(WJ(ω), WJ(ω′)) which acts by composition of a gaussian kernel function kc : RJ × RJ →R
and an embedding map WJ : Ω→RJ with parameter J ∈N. The map WJ returns the resolved state
component of the J nearest spatial neighbors of ωm in a specified order. For example, for a one dimensional
grid and odd J its action is given by
WJ((u, xm)) =
 projr(u)(xm−(J−1)/2), . . . , projr(u)(xm), . . . , projr(u)(xm+(J−1)/2)

.
This can be generalized analogously for higher dimensional grids. The gaussian kernel kc then acts by
kc(WJ(ω), WJ(ω′)) = exp
 −1
ϵ′J ∥WJ(ω) −WJ(ω′)∥2
(13)
where ∥·∥denotes the euclidean norm in RJ and ϵ′ > 0 a bandwidth parameter. Note that the bandwidth
parameter ϵ′ is different from the one introduced earlier in kernel (9); it can again be selected using the
tuning procedure developed in [34].
In our numerical experiments we employ the above kernel using a
variable bandwidth; details on this construction and an algorithm for computing the variable bandwidth
can be found in [37, 38].
For the given product state vector ωm, we use the kernel κc and the full training dataset ΩNM to produce
the function fm ∈HN, fm(·) = κc(ωm, ·), which compares the vector ωm with every other product state
vector included in our training dataset. Intuitively, the function fm can be thought of as a similarity function
on the dataset ΩNM, measuring how “similar” the given state ωm is to the states included in ΩNM. Because
kernel κc acts by composition with WJ, it compares the nearest spatial neighbors of ωm with the nearest
neighbors of every other available state vector, mimicking the structure of the stencil used for the spatial
discretization of the considered dynamics. This makes for a stronger similarity condition than comparing
values of states at only a single gridpoint, forcing the kernel to be more selective in the states it considers
to be dynamically similar to the given ωm.
Next, we use the square root f 1/2
m
to form a multiplication operator and, after orthogonal projection, the
desired quantum effect em ∈B(HL
N). This is then used to condition the prior density operator ρm via the
quantum Bayes rule (4), thereby creating the posterior density operator ρm|em that encodes the state space
similarities captured by fm. Based on our basis representation, this operation takes the form
ρm|em =
emρm
∥emρm∥2
where em denotes the L × L matrix of coefficients of effect em. We refer to the map ωm 7→em as the feature
map and to fm as the feature vector produced by kernel κc from the product state vector ωm. Explanation
for why we use the square root of the feature vector f 1/2
m
instead of fm to build em is given in [13].
Using the procedure outlined above, the density operator ρm = ρ(xm) associated with every point xm
on our grid can be conditioned based on the corresponding product state vector (u, xm). That is, given a
new state vector u ∈X, the density operator ρm is conditioned based on the spatially local information
ωm = (u, xm), by comparing this product state vector to every other product state vector available in our
training dataset. Because the spatially local value ωm is used for the conditioning process (rather than
the full state u), spatial translations of the state u are naturally factored during the conditioning process.
This means that if a spatial translation of the state u is present in our training dataset, then the similarity
between the product state ωm and the corresponding value of the spatial translation of u will be identified
in the conditioning process. For PDEs with spatial translation symmetry, this means that we do not have
to artificially inflate our training dataset by including all spatial translations of the sampled states.
2.6. Multi-trajectory data
In the previous section we presented the data based implementation of our closure scheme using a single
dynamical trajectory as our training dataset. In this section we generalize this construction to the case
where the training dataset consists of multiple trajectories. We begin by motivating the use of multiple
trajectories, before presenting the modifications required in the theoretical and data based formulations of
the scheme.
11
Using a single dynamical trajectory is generally sufficient when considering a dynamical system possessing
a unique physical measure, namely a measure that can be sampled by a set of initial conditions of positive
measure with respect to the ambient measure [39, 40].
Using multiple trajectories is of interest when
considering dynamical systems possessing multiple physical measures; for instance, hamiltonian systems or
hyperbolic systems with several competing basins of attraction. Additionally, using multiple trajectories
is necessary in the forecasting of parameter dependent systems, whose qualitative dynamics changes with
respect to a bifurcation parameter. Finally, even in systems with a unique physical measure, being able to
use multiple trajectories allows one to consider optimal sampling strategies. In designing such a strategy
one tries to optimize the sampling rate with respect to a chosen objective, instead of relying on the inherent
rate provided by a single trajectory.
For example, in Section 3 we will consider an application of our scheme to a closure problem for the shallow
water equations (14), a hyperbolic, energy conservative system of PDEs. Depending on the initial condition,
the solution trajectory of equations (14) can reach different limit sets, since there is no dissipation to focus
the global dynamics to a lower dimensional subset of its state space. As such, using several trajectories
becomes important, allowing us to sample different limit sets of the dynamics.
We consider a finite collection of I ∈N invariant probability measures {µi} on X with mutually disjoint
supports, i ∈{0, . . . , I −1}, and define the invariant probability joint measure µ = PI−1
i=0 µi/I as their
average. By construction, the Hilbert space of observables H = L2(Ω, µ × νM) admits the decomposition
H ≃⊕I−1
i=0 Hi with component spaces Hi = L2(Ω, µi × νM), where the isomorphism is up to a rescaling of
the inner products of Hi by the factor 1/I. Our data based formulation mirrors the one presented in Section
2.5, while also taking advantage of the decomposition of H into its component subspaces.
We generate the finite sampled trajectories {u(i)
n }Ni−1
n=0
of Ni ∈N samples each, where i ∈{0, . . . , I −1}
as above. Each trajectory gives rise to its associated empirical sampling measure µi,Ni = PNi−1
n=0 δu(i)
n /Ni,
where we assume that each sampling measure µi,Ni converges to µi in the weak-∗sense as Ni →∞.
Denoting N = PI−1
i=0 Ni, we define the Hilbert space HN = L2(Ω, µN ×νM) with the joint sampling measure
µN = PI−1
i=0 µi,Ni/I. Since the individual trajectories are assumed to be mutually disjoint, we have the
analogous decomposition HN ≃⊕I−1
i=0 HNi.
Leveraging the decomposition of HN, we use each individual trajectory and the approach described in
Section 2.5 to build an eigenfunction basis for each component space HNi separately. Relying on the Li ∈N
leading eigenfunctions, we then form the subspace HLi
Ni ⊂HNi. Denoting L = PI−1
i=0 Li, we define the
combined space HL
N = ⊕I−1
i=0 HLi
Ni, with the direct sum of the component bases producing a basis for the
combined space.
The basis of HL
N derived in this way consists of a total of L elements, each being an eigenfunction of a
block diagonal operator KN = KN0 ⊕. . . ⊕KNI−1 with the component kernel integral operators KNi in its
diagonal blocks. More specifically, each component basis vector ϕ(i)
ℓ
represents the values of a function on N
samples, with all of its values being zero except for the block of values that corresponds to the Ni samples
of the ith trajectory it was derived from. This approach has lower computational cost, as it requires that
we solve a total of I eigenvalue problems for an Ni × Ni matrix each, instead of a single eigenvalue problem
for an N × N matrix. However, our approach also requires that each component measure µi is individually
adequately sampled, as opposed to adequate joint sampling of measure µ.
Having derived the basis for space HL
N, the construction of the rest of the scheme proceeds as in Section
2.5. The only additional difference is in the definition of the shift operator PN, where time shifts are now
applied only within each trajectory, and the first temporal sample of each trajectory is mapped to zero.
Namely, we make sure not to shift samples across different trajectories.
After forming our QMCl closure model in HL
N, our goal is to use it to predict the dynamics of a chosen
dynamical system for out of sample initial conditions; namely, initial conditions lying outside of the basins
of the component measures µi sampled in the training stage.
12
3. Application
The shallow water equations govern the motion of an incompressible fluid when its vertical length scale
can be considered negligible compared to its horizontal length scale. The equations are derived from the
conservation laws for mass and momentum, with various forms finding applications in areas such as ocean
dynamics, often incorporating additional terms modeling the effects of bottom topography and Coriolis force
[41, 42].
We consider the shallow water equations on a bounded one dimensional spatial domain S with periodic
boundary conditions. The system of equations governs the evolution of the water height h and momentum
q = hv fields, with v denoting the velocity field. The governing equations read
∂th + ∂xq = 0
∂tq + ∂x(q2/h + 1/2Fr−2h2) = 0
(14)
subject to an appropriate initial condition. In the above ∂t and ∂x denote differentiation with respect to
time and space respectively, while Fr denotes the flow’s Froude number, which is a dimensionless ratio
of inertial over gravitational forces. Using the state variable u = (h, q) ∈X ⊂L2(S, ν; R2) and function
f(u) = (q, q2/h + 1/2Fr−2h2) we rewrite (14) in the compact form
∂tu + ∂xf(u) = 0.
(15)
In addition to its applications in ocean dynamics, the shallow water equations problem (15) has ad-
ditional properties that make it a good test case for our QMCl closure framework. First, the dynamics
governed by (15) is equivariant under the actions of the spatial translation group on S. Second, forming
a training dataset that is sufficiently representative of a range of its dynamics requires the use of multiple
dynamical trajectories.
Third, previous works have considered various closure schemes for variations of
(15), demonstrating the amenability of the equations to closure problems that arise from spatial coarsening
[43, 44]. In particular, our discretization and coarsening methodology is based on [44]. Finally, the equations
act as a good idealized model for more complex nonlinear hyperbolic PDEs that are prevalent in fluid and
plasma dynamics modeling.
3.1. Discretization
We employ a finite volume spatial discretization of (15) using a uniform fine grid of Mf ∈N cells with
length ∆x = L/Mf each, centered at points xm ∈S, m ∈{0, . . . , Mf −1}. We use Sf = {xm}Mf −1
m=0
⊂M
to denote the center points of the fine discretization cells.
The cell averaged state variables um, m ∈
{0, . . . , Mf −1}, are defined by taking the spatial average of the original state function u over the cell
centered at xm.
Without misunderstanding, we reuse the same symbol u to denote the averaged state
variables, which can be represented by the vector u ∈R2Mf for every time t ≥0.
The temporal evolution of the fine state variables um is governed by the system of equations
˙um =
1
∆x(Fm −Fm+1)
(16)
using the local Lax-Friedrichs (LLF) numerical flux
Fm = 1
2[f(um−1) + f(um)] −λm
2 (um −um−1)
(17)
with
λm = max
 |qm−1/hm−1| + Fr−1p
hm−1, |qm/hm| + Fr−1p
hm

.
(18)
In the above, subscripts denote components of the associated vectors while Fm denotes the numerical flux
at the left face of the cell centered at xm ∈Sf [45]. Based on (17) and (18) we introduce the notation
Fm = FLLF (um−1, um)
13
which will be used later on to define the coarse grid fluxes.
We now form a coarse grid and associated coarse state variables defined as local spatial averages of the
fine variables um. In particular we form Mc ∈N coarse grid cells by merging every Ms ∈N fine cells; in
this way, Mc = Mf/Ms and each coarse cell has length ∆ˆx = Ms∆x. We define the resulting coarse grid
Sc = {ˆxm}Mc−1
m=0
⊂S, m ∈{0, . . . , Mc −1}, representing the center points of the coarse grid cells. Each
coarse grid state variable ˆum is defined as the average of the fine state variables included within its associated
coarse grid cell. The coarse variables are represented by the vector ˆu ∈R2Mc for every time t ≥0. Their
temporal evolution is governed by the system of equations
˙ˆum =
1
∆ˆx[( ˆFm + Gm) −( ˆFm+1 + Gm+1)]
(19)
with coarse grid fluxes
ˆFm = FLLF (ˆum−1, ˆum)
(20)
and subgrid fluxes
Gm = FMsm −ˆFm.
(21)
The system (19) is equivariant under the actions of the discrete group of spatial translations on Sc.
By definition, the coarse grid fluxes (20) depend only on the coarse variables. On the contrary, the
subgrid fluxes (21) depend on both the coarse and the original fine variables; in particular, they depend
on the values of um in the fine cells that border the interfaces of each coarse cell. For the physical system
considered, the subgrid fluxes act as antidiffusive corrections to the coarse grid fluxes, increasing the accuracy
of the discretization compared to one performed entirely on the coarse grid [44].
The temporal discretization of evolution equations (16) and (19) is carried out using the modified Euler
method (two-stage Runge-Kutta), which has favorable structure preservation properties for the present
problem [44]. In what follows, we consider the coarse grid variables as the resolved degrees of freedom and
the discrete time version of (19) as the equation generating the resolved dynamics. To close the system
of equations we need to provide a closure model that can infer the subgrid fluxes Gm from the resolved
variables ˆum, thereby removing the explicit dependence on the original fine grid variables um.
3.2. Closure model
To generate our training dataset and be able to compare our surrogate model with a reference model
acting as the ground truth, we approximate the “true” shallow water dynamics by the discrete time version
of the fine grid dynamics (16). As such, the full state space of the dynamics is a Hilbert subspace of the set
of L2 functions on the grid produced by our fine discretization. More specifically we set X ⊂L2(S, νf; R2),
where νf denotes the restriction of the Lebesgue volume measure ν to the σ-algebra generated by the fine
discretization cells.
As mentioned in the previous section, we consider the coarse grid variables as our resolved degrees of
freedom. Therefore, we define the resolved state space Xr = L2(S, νc; R2) ∩X and decompose the full state
space as X = Xr ⊕Xu, with unresolved state space Xu = X⊥
r . In the definition of Xr, the measure νc
corresponds to the restriction of ν to the σ-algebra of sets generated by the coarse discretization cells. As
a result, the resolved state space can be considered as a space of piecewise constant functions, each taking
a constant value on each cell formed by the coarse discretization. With these choices in place, the full
dynamics Φn∆t is given by the discrete time version of (16) and the resolved dynamics Φn∆ˆt
r
by the discrete
time version of (19), with n ∈N and respective timesteps ∆t > 0 and ∆ˆt = Ms∆t.
We define the product state space Ω= X × S and the Hilbert space of observables HN = L2(Ω, σN),
with total number of samples N ∈N and measures σN = µN × νM and νM = νc. For notational consistency
with the previous sections, from now on we denote by M = Mc the number of coarse grid cells and by
SM = Sc ⊂S the set of gridpoints representing the coarse grid cells. We introduce two flux functions
fj ∈HN, j ∈{0, 1}, producing the fluxes for the height and momentum variables respectively, and denote
their collection by f = {fj}1
j=0. For every state u ∈X the associated fluxes fj(u) are given by (21).
Using the full dynamics (16) we generate N samples of the resolved state variables {ˆun}N−1
n=0 and the
fluxes {f(un, ·)}N−1
n=0 , which will be used as our training data and may consist of one or more dynamical
14
trajectories. Each sample ˆun or f(un, ·) is represented by a vector in R2M holding the values corresponding
to the height h and momentum q variables in each coarse grid cell.
To form our closure model we define a field of quantum density operators ρ: SM →B(HN) and two
quantum observables Aj ∈B(HN), j ∈{0, 1}.
Each density operator ρ(xm) will be used to model in
a statistical sense the unresolved variables in the coarse grid cell centered at xm ∈SM. From the two
quantum observables, observable A0 will be used to produce the surrogate fluxes for the height h variables
and is defined as multiplication by the true flux function f0; analogously, observable A1 will produce the
surrogate fluxes for the momentum q variables and is defined as multiplication by f1. With these definitions
in place, the surrogate fluxes are computed using the two surrogate flux functions ˜fj : SM →R with action
˜f0(xm) = tr(ρ(xm)A0) and ˜f1(xm) = tr(ρ(xm)A1) for every xm ∈SM.
In Appendix A we list the sequence of steps used to build the data based QMCl model and apply it to
predict the dynamics based on a given initial condition.
3.3. Numerical results
We consider the shallow water equations (15) on the spatial domain S = [−25, 25] with Froude number
Fr = 1/√2g, where g denotes the acceleration of gravity. We perform the spatial discretization using a fine
grid of Mf = 1920 cells and the temporal discretization using the midpoint Euler method with timestep
∆t = 0.1∆x, where ∆x is the length of each fine cell.
Training
We define the one-parameter family of initial conditions
h0(x) = 1 + 0.3(1 −δ/2) sin
 2π
LS
3.5(1 −δ/2)x + π/6

v0(x) = 1 + 0.2(1 −δ) sin
 2π
LS
3(1 −δ)x

(22)
with x ∈S, LS = 50, parameter δ ∈[0, 1], h0 the initial condition for height and q0 = h0v0 the initial
condition for momentum. The solutions generated by this family of initial conditions feature a number
of wave fronts traveling in different directions and interacting with one another. Figures 2 and 3 present
space-time heatmaps of the solutions that will be used to test the predictive performance of our closure
model.
Using the assumptions and methodology introduced in Section 2.6 for dealing with training data con-
sisting of multiple trajectories, we consider µ to be the invariant measure generated by the full dynamics
(16) restricted to the family of initial conditions (22) for δ ∈[0, 1]. To sample this measure we use three
trajectories generated using the values δ ∈{0, 0.5, 1}. For each trajectory we integrate the full dynamics
(16) in time for 12,200 timesteps and then sample the next 3,260 timesteps. Each sample contains the values
of functions h and q on the fine grid.
To derive the resolved state samples that will be used as our training data, we spatially average the
collected samples. By averaging the state data over every Ms = 20 fine cells we arrive at a coarse grid of
M = 96 cells of length ∆ˆx = 20∆x each. Given that each cell is now 20 times longer, we also increase the
sampling timestep by the same amount to set ∆ˆt = 20∆t. From the original 3,260 samples per trajectory
generated on the fine grid, we keep every 20th sample, leading to 163 samples per trajectory. For each one
of those samples we spatially average the solution over every 20 cells to derive our resolved state samples,
namely the averaged values of h and q over the coarse grid. We then derive the subgrid flux training samples
using (21).
Using Q = 64 delays, these samples yield 100 training samples per trajectory in delay embedded form,
adding up to N = 300 samples in total. Each resolved state sample consists of 2M = 192 values, 96 for
each of the height and momentum variables.
With this training dataset, the dimension of the product
Hilbert space HN is equal to NM = 28800. Employing the approach described in Section 2.6 we build an
orthonormal basis {ϕℓ}L−1
ℓ=0 with a total of L = 6144 eigenfunctions and define HL
N as their linear span. Each
eigenfunction is represented by a vector in RNM. Finally, we set J = 5 to define the stencil map WJ that
15
Figure 1: Space-time heatmaps depicting two eigenfunctions ϕℓof the kernel integral operator KN from (12) for each of the
three trajectories used as our training data. The top row shows the third eigenfunction for each of the three trajectories; the
bottom row the fourth eigenfunction for each trajectory. From left to right, the first column corresponds to the trajectory data
obtained for δ = 0, the second to δ = 0.5 and the third to δ = 1.
will be used for the bayesian conditioning of the quantum density operators. The data based realization of
the closure model developed in Section 3.2 will take place in the constructed subspace HL
N.
The number of delays Q was chosen by a combination of physical reasoning and trial and error to balance
the effectiveness of the derived basis in representing the true flux samples and the cost associated with its
computation. A useful rule of thumb is to select a delay window that is comparable to the dominant timescale
of the physical processes of interest. In our case, we see that the traveling wave fronts interact approximately
every 30 timesteps (≈1.5 time units) for the solution in Figure 2, and approximately every 50 timesteps
(≈2.5 time units) for the solution in Figure 3, with similar results for additional solutions not shown here.
Using Q = 64 timesteps is sufficient to ensure that at least one period of this interaction is captured in each
delay embedded sample. Additionally, increasing the value of Q further did not lead to noticeable differences
in our results. The stencil size J used for the conditioning of the quantum density operators was chosen
empirically. Increasing the value of J further was shown to slightly improve the performance of the bayesian
conditioning, but with an associated increase in computational cost.
To form the orthonormal basis {ϕℓ}L−1
ℓ=0 we must compute the eigenvectors of the NM × NM symmetric
kernel matrix KN representing the operator (12). To reduce the computational cost of this operation we
perform a partial Cholesky factorization of KN to approximate it by a lower rank matrix ˜
KN = F F T with
F ∈RNM×r and r < NM. We perform the factorization using the rank parameter r = L = 6144 and
the randomized algorithm developed in [46]. We then use the approximate kernel matrix to perform its
16
bistochastic normalization and solve the eigenvalue problem with reduced cost [31].
A selection of the resulting eigenfunctions is presented in Figure 1, where we show two eigenfunctions
for each of the three trajectories used to build our training dataset.
The shown eigenfunctions exhibit
propagating fronts which resemble the main features of the true state and flux samples presented in Figures
2 and 3. More specifically, they are approximately constant on the characteristic lines of the propagating
wave fronts, as expected from their symmetry invariance property. Similar features are present in the rest of
the eigenfunctions not shown here. As explained in Sections 2.3 and 2.4, the strong dynamical relevance of
each eigenfunction is a result of its dynamical symmetry invariance and of the fact that generally it cannot
be represented as the tensor product of a single pair of spatial and temporal modes. These properties allow
us to compute a compressed representation of the true dynamics with a moderate number of eigenfunctions,
enhancing the computational efficiency of the resulting closure scheme.
Prediction
To test the predictive performance of the surrogate model derived by QMCl we use two initial conditions
obtained from (22) for δ ∈{0.25, 0.75}, which are trajectories not included in the training dataset. After
integrating the true dynamics (16) for 12,200 timesteps we spatially average the found solutions to generate
the initial conditions that will be used to initialize the resolved state in QMCl. Using those initial conditions
we integrate in time the coarse dynamics (19) using timestep ∆ˆt and the subgrid fluxes predicted by QMCl.
In what follows, we present results obtained after integrating for a total of 120 timesteps, while performing
the bayesian conditioning of the quantum density operators every 10 timesteps.
The results comparing the evolution under the true and surrogate models are grouped into four figures.
Figures 2 and 4 include the results for the trajectory generated by the initial condition obtained from (22)
for δ = 0.25. Figures 3 and 5 showcase the results obtained for δ = 0.75.
Looking at the heatmaps for the height and momentum fields in Figure 2 for the trajectory with δ = 0.25
and in Figure 3 for the one with δ = 0.75, we see that QMCl clearly captures the main features of the
dynamics for the tested time horizon. For both trajectories, QMCl correctly predicts the main traveling
wave features of the dynamics, including the spatial variations of the waves as they interact with one another.
Moreover, the magnitude of the predicted fields is consistent with the true dynamics in most regions of the
spatial domain. In addition to the results shown in these figures, we have also verified that QMCl can
reproduce the dynamical trajectories included in its training dataset with good accuracy.
In the present closure model, the subgrid fluxes play the role of antidiffusive corrections to the fluxes
generated entirely on the coarse grid [44]. Their values are proportional to the spatial derivative of the
associated field, taking large values when the height or momentum field is changing rapidly in space, and
approximately zero value when the fields are constant in space. As a result, the contribution of the subgrid
fluxes is critical in regions of strong spatial variation of the height and momentum fields, counterbalancing the
increased diffusion of the solution introduced by our coarsening of the original dynamics by spatial averaging.
The strong spatial variation of the true subgrid fluxes renders the considered dynamics challenging to resolve
and predict accurately by any closure scheme (Section 3.4). Typically, when the exact value of the subgrid
fluxes is not predicted correctly by the employed closure model (derived by QMCl or another method), the
surrogate evolution will be more diffusive than the true evolution.
The effect of diffusion can be seen in the heatmaps for the two trajectories. By comparing the true and
predicted fields of height and momentum, we see that the surrogate dynamics involves stronger diffusion of
the solution in areas where there is strong spatial variation. The increased diffusion is seen in the plots as
bleeding of color between different space-time regions, with the boundaries between those regions being less
sharp than in the true dynamics. Similarly, the same effect can be seen by comparing the subgrid flux fields
for height and momentum. In the true dynamics, the peaks of the fluxes are sharp and clearly separated from
the valleys, with clearly visible waves traveling in opposite directions. In the predicted dynamics, although
the waves are still predicted correctly, their peaks are not as sharp, with their values diffusing more strongly
to the surrounding region.
The subgrid flux plots also clearly demonstrate the effect of the bayesian conditioning of the quantum
density operators, which for these results is performed every 10 timesteps (≈0.5 time units). One can see the
discontinuities that occur every 10 timesteps for the predicted fluxes over large regions of the spatial domain.
17
Figure 2: Space-time heatmaps for the trajectory with δ = 0.25. The top row shows the results for the resolved state variables;
the bottom row for the subgrid fluxes. For each row, from left to right: the first two plots show the results for the height field
h, with the true results on the left and the predicted results on the right; the next two plots show the results for the momentum
field q, with true results on the left and predicted on the right.
These discontinuities represent corrections introduced to the predicted flux values every time conditioning
of the density operators is performed. We perform the bayesian conditioning every 10 timesteps to reduce
the computational cost of the simulation, since the conditioning is one of the most expensive operations in
our closure scheme (Section 3.4). In general, the prediction accuracy increases with increased conditioning
frequency. Based on our numerical experiments, conditioning the density operators every 10 timesteps strikes
a good balance between prediction accuracy and computational cost for the considered dynamics.
Similar conclusions can be drawn from the spatial profiles shown in Figure 4 for the trajectory with
δ = 0.25 and Figure 5 for that with δ = 0.75.
In these plots one can see that the subgrid fluxes are
proportional to the spatial derivative of the associated field, leading to sharp variations in space.
The
18
Figure 3: Space-time heatmaps for the trajectory with δ = 0.75. The layout of the plots is as in Figure 2.
predicted dynamics preserves the main features of the true fields, but struggles to capture the sharp peaks
of the subgrid fluxes, leading to stronger diffusion of the height and momentum fields in regions of strong
spatial variation.
To further demonstrate the crucial role played by the subgrid fluxes in counterbalancing diffusion, in
Figure 6 we compare the evolution of the QMCl surrogate dynamics with the true dynamics generated
entirely on the coarse grid, namely with the subgrid fluxes (21) set to zero. The comparison is carried out
for the trajectory generated from the initial condition (22) with δ = 0.25 (Figures 2 and 4), but similar
conclusions can be drawn from other initial conditions. The comparison demonstrates that the surrogate
fluxes predicted by QMCl successfully counteract the diffusive effect of the spatial coarsening seen in the
coarse grid simulation for the tested time horizon. Namely, although the subgrid fluxes predicted by QMCl
are not as accurate as the true subgrid fluxes in regions of strong spatial variation of the solution, they
19
Figure 4: Spatial profiles of the final solution snapshot for the trajectory with δ = 0.25. The top row shows the results for
the resolved state and the subgrid fluxes for the height field h; the bottom row for the momentum field q. In each row, the
true results are on the left subplot, the predicted ones on the right subplot. Within each subplot, full lines are used for the
resolved state, with their numerical values indicated on the left axis; dashed lines are used for the subgrid fluxes, with their
values indicated on the right axis.
are nevertheless effective in counterbalancing diffusion and thus improving the accuracy of the predicted
dynamics.
3.4. Discussion
In the following paragraphs we discuss several aspects of the presented closure scheme and how they
inform future research directions.
Computational aspects
Extending the QMCl framework to spatiotemporal dynamics comes with the challenge of increased
computational cost for its implementation, primarily due to the increased size of the training dataset required
to capture the main features of dynamics that evolves in both space and time. One key area of focus for
future work is reducing the cost of the numerical implementation of QMCl and improving its scaling with
the number of temporal samples N, grid size M and spectral resolution L.
In the offline stage, the most expensive operation is computing the leading L eigenfunctions of the
NM × NM symmetric kernel matrix KN representing the kernel integral operator (12). Even for moderate
size parameters N and M, solving such an eigenvalue problem can quickly become very expensive.
As
explained in Section 3.3, to address this we performed a partial Cholesky factorization of KN to approximate
it by a lower rank matrix and solve the resulting eigenvalue problem with reduced cost [31, 46].
As an alternative we also tried using the random Fourier features (RFF) method to approximate KN by
a lower rank matrix [47]. However, we found that a relatively large number of Fourier features was required
to obtain a satisfactory approximation of KN, compared to the rank parameter r required for the partial
Cholesky factorization [48]. The poor approximations obtained using the RFF method led to issues in the
downstream bistochastic normalization of the approximate kernel matrix, which is why we did not use this
approach in the present work.
20
Figure 5: Spatial profiles of the final solution snapshot for the trajectory with δ = 0.75. The layout of the plots is as in Figure
4.
In the online stage, the most expensive operation is the bayesian conditioning of the quantum density
operators; more specifically, building the quantum effect operator from the current resolved state. To form
the quantum effect operators we use kernel (13) to compare the current resolved product state vector to all
product state vectors present in our training dataset. This is the only online operation that scales with the
size of the training dataset NM, and requires that we have the training data loaded in memory throughout
the online stage.
One way of alleviating this cost is to form a reduced representation of the training dataset and use it
to build the quantum effect operators. For instance, one can employ the sampling algorithm underlying
the partial Cholesky factorization algorithms [46] to extract a representative subset of the original training
dataset, and rely only on that subset for the conditioning of the density operators. An alternative would
be to use the RFF method to approximate the out of sample evaluation of kernel (13), thereby eliminating
the dependence on the training data [47, 49]. In our case, this would require keeping in memory one L × L
matrix for each random Fourier feature used, leading to an unsustainable memory cost.
In QMCl the surrogate fluxes are computed as the expected value of an observable with respect to a
density operator. As a result, to compute fluxes that vary strongly over the spatial domain one has to ensure
that the used density operators are very sharp: obtaining a clear maximum in some regions of product space
Ωand being close to zero elsewhere, formally similar to a sum of Dirac delta measures. Working with such
sharp density operators poses a number of computational challenges.
Producing accurate but very sharp density operators requires a very precise choice of the bandwidth
parameter ϵ′ used in kernel (13) for the bayesian conditioning. Having such a selective kernel means that
the resulting density operators lead to highly accurate fluxes when the correct part of the training dataset
is identified as dynamically relevant. However, it can lead to inaccurate fluxes when regions of the training
dataset are misidentified as relevant, compared to using a less selective kernel that leads to wider averaging
of the employed observable.
Moreover, working with a very selective kernel makes it more likely that
no part of the training dataset is identified as dynamically relevant, leading to an approximately zero
feature vector and posterior density operator. In such a case, attempting to normalize the posterior density
operator to unit norm can yield unpredictable results. Working with a wider, less selective kernel makes this
21
Figure 6: Space-time heatmaps for the trajectory with δ = 0.25 comparing the dynamics on the coarse grid with the surrogate
dynamics obtained by QMCl. From left to right, the first two plots show the results for the height field h, with the coarse
grid results on the left and the QMCl results on the right; the next two plots show the results for the momentum field q, with
coarse grid results on the left and QMCl on the right. The colorbars for each subplot are as in Figure 2.
scenario less likely to occur, albeit with the tradeoff of less informative conditioning and thus less accurate
predicted fluxes. Finally, even if very sharp density operators can be consistently obtained, their accurate
representation with respect to our eigenfunction basis will likely require a large number of eigenfunctions,
leading to more expensive simulations.
The challenges involved in producing and working with very selective kernel functions motivate our use
of a kernel bandwidth tuning algorithm [34] and of the introduction of variable bandwidth [37, 38]. These
measures help us define a kernel function that is tailored to the characteristics of our training dataset, which
in turn allows us to strike a reasonable compromise between numerical stability and sharpness of the kernel
used for bayesian conditioning. As a result, we are able to construct a closure scheme that can predict
the main features of the considered dynamics with reasonable computational cost and without numerical
instabilities.
Theoretical aspects
One of the distinguishing features of the QMCl framework is that the classical dynamics is first embedded
into the noncommutative setting of operator algebras used in quantum mechanics, and only then discretized
to finite dimension. Namely, instead of directly discretizing functions on Hilbert space H to obtain functions
on finite dimensional subspace HL, we first map functions on H to operators in B(H) and then discretize
them to operators in B(HL). This process renders the discretization employed by QMCl positivity pre-
serving, with positive classical observables and probability density functions mapped to positive definite
operators.
In addition to positivity preservation, this discretization process embeds the discretized quantities in
a space of larger dimension than direct discretization. More specifically, direct discretization maps real
functions on H to functions on the L-dimensional subspace HL. The QMCl discretization maps real functions
on H to selfadjoint real operators in B(HL), which is a subspace of dimension 1
2L(L + 1). A potential line
of future research is exploring whether this difference in dimension, along with the noncommutative nature
22
of B(HL), allow QMCl to encode more statistical information about the original dynamics compared to
closure schemes performed directly in HL.
Another line of research concerns the out of sample performance of QMCl. In Sections 2.6 and 3.3 we
considered training data generated from a finite collection of initial conditions, without making reference
to an explicit process of generating these initial conditions. A natural next step is to consider an invariant
measure µ that admits a decomposition into conditional measures µi, sampled from a probability distribution
of initial conditions. Interesting questions in this direction are to characterize the behavior of our closure
scheme as the number of sampled trajectories increases, and to derive associated out of sample error bounds.
4. Conclusion
We developed a framework for the dynamical closure of spatiotemporal dynamics which combines ele-
ments of the quantum mechanical closure (QMCl) framework developed in [13] and the vector valued spectral
analysis (VSA) methodology of [14]. The presented framework encodes statistical information about the
unresolved degrees of freedom of the considered dynamics in the form of a field of quantum density operators
on the spatial domain. This results in a flexible architecture where density operators are collocated with the
discretization cells of the coarse model for the resolved dynamics. The density operators communicate with
the resolved dynamics by: (1) providing the required flux terms through the expected value of quantum
observables; (2) receiving information through kernel feature maps. Importantly, our approach inherits the
symmetry factorization properties of VSA during the basis construction process, and can also be used with
training data consisting of multiple dynamical trajectories. As with the original QMCl work, the process
of embedding the original dynamics into the noncommutative setting of quantum mechanics leads to the
positivity preserving discretization of classical observables and probability density functions.
We applied QMCl to a closure problem for the shallow water equations on a periodic one dimensional
domain. The numerical results demonstrate that QMCl can effectively predict the dynamics of the out
of sample initial conditions tested in this work, generating height and momentum fields that agree both
qualitatively and quantitatively with the true dynamics. As expected from the strong spatial variation of
the subgrid fluxes, the QMCl surrogate dynamics is more diffusive than the true dynamics, and eventually
struggles to fully capture the sharp spatial features of the true solution.
Nevertheless, we believe that
the results act as a successful proof of concept for the extension of QMCl to spatiotemporal dynamics,
especially given the modest amount of data used for its training. Everything else kept the same, we expect
that increasing the number of training samples or the spectral resolution will lead to improved prediction
accuracy.
Future research directions include improving the computational cost of QMCl and the development of
strategies for sampling initial conditions in the training stage. In addition, we plan to explore applications
of QMCl to systems exhibiting chaotic spatiotemporal dynamics.
Acknowledgements
DG and JS acknowledge support from the U.S. Department of Energy under grant DE-SC0025101.
CV was supported as a postdoctoral researcher from this grant. DG acknowledges support from the U.S.
Department of Defense, Basic Research Office under Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship grant N00014-21-1-
2946. DCF was supported as a PhD student from this grant. We thank Ilon Joseph, Michael Montgomery
and Ilya Timofeyev for helpful conversations on the topics of this work.
Appendix A. Numerical implementation
The process of building and using the developed QMCl scheme to simulate the surrogate dynamics
consists of two stages: the offline and online stages. Below we outline the steps followed in each stage.
23
Offline stage
The offline stage consists of the operations needed to build the QMCl scheme using the training samples
for the resolved state variables {ˆun}N−1
n=0 and the subgrid fluxes {f(un, ·)}N−1
n=0 . This involves the following
sequence of steps.
1. Use the state samples {ˆun} to calibrate the bandwidth parameter ϵ for the kernel (9) and perform its
bistochastic normalization.
2. Use the state samples {ˆun} to compute the leading L eigenfunctions {ϕℓ} of the normalized integral
operator (12), defining the subspace HL
N as their linear span. The eigenfunction basis is represented
by the NM × L matrix Φ holding one eigenfunction in each column.
3. Form the transfer operator P L
N and its L × L coefficients matrix P L
N.
4. Use the flux samples {f(un, ·)} to form the two quantum observables A0, A1 ∈B(HL
N), computing
their L × L coefficients matrices A0 and A1. Observable A0 is built using the flux samples {f0(xn, ·)}
corresponding to the height h variables; observable A1 using {f1(xn, ·)} corresponding to the q vari-
ables.
5. Define the field of quantum density operators ρ: S →B(HL
N), assigning one density operator to each
coarse grid cell. For each gridpoint xm ∈SM, the associated density operator ρ(xm) is represented by
the vector ρm in RL.
6. Use the state samples {ˆun} to calibrate the bandwidth parameter ϵ′ of the kernel (13) and compute
the bandwidth function needed for its variable bandwidth generalization.
Online stage
In the online stage we use the model built in the offline stage to timestep the surrogate dynamics. We
denote by ˜u ∈Xr the resolved state predicted by QMCl, to distinguish it from the true resolved state ˆu.
The online stage consists of the following steps.
1. Initialize the resolved state ˜u.
2. Initialize the density operators ρ representing each coarse grid cell by using an uninformative initial
condition: set each density operator ρ(xm) to the projection along the unit function 1N ∈HL
N that
takes the value 1 everywhere.
3. Condition each density operator using the initial resolved state ˜u and the training data {ˆun}.
4. Use the density operators ρ and the observables A0 and A1 to compute the surrogate fluxes ˜f, corre-
sponding to two flux values for each coarse grid cell.
5. Begin the timestepping loop.
(a) Update the resolved state ˜u using the surrogate fluxes.
(b) Update the density operators ρ using the transfer operator.
(c) Condition the density operators ρ using the updated resolved state ˜u and the state training
samples {ˆun}.
(d) Compute the updated surrogate fluxes ˜f.
In the timestepping loop as presented above, the bayesian conditioning of the density operators is per-
formed every timestep. In our presented numerical results, we have instead elected to condition the density
operators every 10 timesteps (Section 3.3).
References
[1] P. Sagaut, Large eddy simulation for incompressible flows, Springer, Berlin, 2006.
[2] W. E, Principles of multiscale modeling, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2011.
[3] D. J. Stensrud, Parameterization schemes, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2013.
24
[4] A. Arakawa, W. H. Schubert, Interaction of a cumulus cloud ensemble with the large-scale environment,
Part I, J. Atmos. Sci. 31 (3) (1974) 674–701. doi:10.1175/1520-0469(1974)031<0674:IOACCE>2.0.
CO;2.
[5] P. R. Gent, J. C. McWilliams, Isopycnal mixing in ocean circulation models, J. Phys. Oceanogr. 20 (1)
(1990) 150–155. doi:10.1175/1520-0485(1990)020<0150:IMIOCM>2.0.CO;2.
[6] W. E, E. Engquist, X. Li, W. Ren, E. Vanden-Eijnden, Heterogeneous multiscale methods: a review,
Commun. Comput. Phys. 2 (2007) 367–450.
[7] W. W. Grabowski, P. K. Smolarkiewicz, CRCP: A cloud resolving convection parameterization of the
tropical atmosphere, Phys. D 133 (1–4) (1999) 171–178.
[8] I. Grooms, A. J. Majda, Efficient stochastic superparameterization for geophysical turbulence, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 110 (12) (2013) 4464–4469.
[9] G. W. Hammett, F. W. Perkins, Fluid moment models for Landau damping with application to the
ion-temperature-gradient instability, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 (1990) 3019–3022.
[10] I. Joseph, A. M. Dimits, Connecting collisionless Landau fluid closures to collisional plasma physics
models, Contrib. Plasma Physics 56 (6–8) (2016) 504–510.
[11] C. Ma, B. Zhu, X.-Q. Xu, W. Wang, Machine learning surrogate models for Landau fluid closure, Phys.
Plasmas 27 (4) (2020) 042502.
[12] B. Laperre, J. Amaya, S. Jamal, G. Lapenta, Identification of high order closure terms from fully kinetic
simulations using machine learning, Phys. Plasmas 29 (3) (2022) 032706.
[13] D. C. Freeman, D. Giannakis, J. Slawinska, Quantum mechanics for closure of dynamical systems,
Multiscale Model. Simul. 22 (1) (2024) 283–333. doi:10.1137/22M1514246.
[14] D. Giannakis, A. Ourmazd, J. Slawinska, Z. Zhao, Spatiotemporal pattern extraction by spectral
analysis of vector-valued observables, J. Nonlinear Sci. 29 (5) (2019) 2385–2445.
doi:10.1007/
s00332-019-09548-1.
[15] C. Bardos, F. Golse, D. Levermore, Fluid dynamic limits of kinetic equations I: formal derivations, J.
Stat. Phys. 63 (1–2) (1991) 323–344. doi:10.1007/BF01026608.
[16] S. Rasp, M. S. Pritchard, P. Gentine, Deep learning to represent subgrid processes in climate models,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115 (39) (2018) 9684–9689.
[17] J. Yuval, P. A. O’Gormann, Stable machine-learning parameterization of subgrid processes for climate
modeling at a range of resolutions, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 3295.
[18] H. J. Bae, P. Koumoutsakos, Scientific multi-agent reinforcement learning for wall-models of turbulent
flows, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022) 1443.
[19] A. Bracco, J. Brajard, H. A. Dijkstra, P. Hassanzadeh, C. Lessig, C. Monteleoni, Machine learning for
the physics of climate, Nat. Rev. Phys. 7 (2025) 6–20.
[20] T. N. Palmer, A nonlinear dynamical perspective on model error: a proposal for non-local stochastic-
dynamic parametrization in weather and climate prediction models, Quart. J. Roy. Meteorol. Soc. 127
(2001) 279–304.
[21] A. J. Majda, I. Timofeyev, E. Vanden Eijnden, Models for stochastic climate predicition, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 96 (1999) 14687–14691.
25
[22] A. J. Chorin, F. Lu, Discrete approach to stochastic parametrization and dimension reduction in non-
linear dynamics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112 (2015) 9804–9809.
[23] J. Berner, U. Achatz, L. Batté, L. Bengtsson, A. D. L. Cámara, H. M. Christensen, M. Colangeli,
D. R. B. Coleman, D. Crommelin, S. I. Dolaptchiev, C. L. E. Franzke, P. Friederichs, P. Imkeller,
H. Järvinen, S. Juricke, V. Kitsios, F. Lott, V. Lucarini, S. Mahajan, T. N. Palmer, C. Penland,
M. Sakradzija, J.-S. Von Storch, A. Weisheimer, M. Weniger, P. D. Williams, J.-I. Yano, Stochastic
parameterization: toward a new view of weather and climate models, Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 98 (3)
(2017) 565–588.
[24] A. Lasota, M. C. Mackey, Chaos, fractals, and noise, 2nd Edition, Springer, New York, 1994. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4612-4286-4.
[25] B. C. Hall, Quantum theory for mathematicians, Springer, New York, 2013.
[26] J. J. Sakurai, J. Napolitano, Modern quantum mechanics, 3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2021.
[27] D. Mauro, On Koopman–von Neumann waves, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17 (09) (2002) 1301–1325. doi:
10.1142/S0217751X02009680.
[28] D. I. Bondar, F. Gay-Balmaz, C. Tronci, Koopman wavefunctions and classical–quantum correlation
dynamics, Proc. R. Soc. A. 475 (2229) (2019) 20180879. doi:10.1098/rspa.2018.0879.
[29] I. Joseph, Koopman–von Neumann approach to quantum simulation of nonlinear classical dynamics,
Phys. Rev. Res. 2 (4) (2020) 043102. doi:10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043102.
[30] P. Busch, P. J. Lahti, P. Mittelstaedt, The quantum theory of measurement, Springer, Berlin, 1996.
[31] C. Vales, D. Giannakis, Accelerated decomposition of bistochastic kernel matrices by low rank approx-
imation, arXiv:2510.26574 (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.26574.
[32] R. Temam, Infinite-dimensional dynamical systems in mechanics and physics, 2nd Edition, Springer,
New York, 1997.
[33] J. C. Robinson, Infinite-dimensional dynamical systems, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.
[34] R. R. Coifman, Y. Shkolnisky, F. J. Sigworth, A. Singer, Graph laplacian tomography from unknown
random projections, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 17 (10) (2008) 1891–1899.
[35] R. R. Coifman, M. J. Hirn, Bi-stochastic kernels via asymmetric affinity functions, Appl. Comput.
Harmon. Anal. 35 (1) (2013) 177–180.
[36] S. Das, D. Giannakis, J. Slawinska, Reproducing kernel Hilbert space compactification of unitary evo-
lution groups, Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 54 (2021) 75–136.
[37] T. Berry, J. Harlim, Variable bandwidth diffusion kernels, Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 40 (1) (2016)
68–96. doi:10.1016/j.acha.2015.01.001.
[38] D. Giannakis, Data-driven spectral decomposition and forecasting of ergodic dynamical systems, Appl.
Comput. Harmon. Anal. 47 (2) (2019) 338–396. doi:10.1016/j.acha.2017.09.001.
[39] L.-S. Young, What are SRB measures, and which dynamical systems have them?, J. Stat. Phys.
108 (5/6) (2002) 733–754.
[40] M. Blank, Ergodic averaging with and without invariant measures, Nonlinearity 30 (12) (2017) 4649–
4664.
26
[41] G. K. Vallis, Atmospheric and oceanic fluid dynamics, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2017.
[42] G. B. Whitham, Linear and nonlinear waves, Wiley, New York, 1999.
[43] M. Zacharuk, S. I. Dolaptchiev, U. Achatz, I. Timofeyev, Stochastic subgrid-scale parametrization
for one-dimensional shallow-water dynamics using stochastic mode reduction, Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc.
144 (715) (2018) 1975–1990. doi:10.1002/qj.3396.
[44] I. Timofeyev, A. Schwarzmann, D. Kuzmin, Application of machine learning and convex limiting to
subgrid flux modeling in the shallow-water equations, Math. Comput. Simul. 238 (2025) 163–178.
doi:10.1016/j.matcom.2025.04.031.
[45] R. J. LeVeque, Finite volume methods for hyperbolic problems, Cambridge University Press, New York,
2002.
[46] Y. Chen, E. N. Epperly, J. A. Tropp, R. J. Webber, Randomly pivoted Cholesky: practical approxi-
mation of a kernel matrix with few entry evaluations, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 78 (2024) 995–1041.
doi:10.1002/cpa.22234.
[47] A. Rahimi, B. Recht, Random features for large-scale kernel machines, in: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, Vol. 20, Curran Associates, 2007, pp. 1177–1184.
[48] T. Yang, Y.-F. Li, M. Mahdavi, R. Jin, Z.-H. Zhou, Nyström method vs random Fourier features: a
theoretical and empirical comparison, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 25,
Curran Associates, 2012, pp. 476–484.
[49] D. Giannakis, A. Henriksen, J. A. Tropp, R. Ward, Learning to forecast dynamical systems from
streaming data, SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Syst. 22 (2) (2023) 527–558. doi:10.1137/21M144983X.
27
