Special Issue Paper
The International Journal of High
Performance Computing Applications
2021, Vol. 35(6) 508 –526
© The Author(s) 2021Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/10943420211022811
journals.sagepub.com/home/hpcAMReX: Block-structured adaptive mesh
reﬁnement for multiphysics applications
Weiqun Zhang1, Andrew Myers1, Kevin Gott2, Ann Almgren1
and John Bell1
Abstract
Block-structured adaptive mesh re ﬁnement (AMR) provides the basis for the temporal and spatial discretization strategy
for a number of Exascale Computing Project applications in the areas of accelerator design, additive manufacturing,astrophysics, combustion, cosmology, multiphase ﬂow, and wind plant modeling. AMReX is a software framework that
provides a uni ﬁed infrastructure with the functionality needed for these and other AMR applications to be able to effectively
and ef ﬁciently utilize machines from laptops to exascale architectures. AMR reduces the computational cost and memory
footprint compared to a uniform mesh while preserving accurate descriptions of different physical processes in complexmultiphysics algorithms. AMReX supports algorithms that solve systems of partial differential equations in simple orcomplex geometries and those that use particles and/or particle –mesh operations to represent component physical
processes. In this article, we will discuss the core elements of the AMReX framework such as data containers and iteratorsas well as several specialized operations to meet the needs of the application projects. In addition, we will highlight thestrategy that the AMReX team is pursuing to achieve highly performant code across a range of accelerator-based ar-
chitectures for a variety of different applications.
Keywords
Adaptive mesh re ﬁnement, co-design, particles, performance portability, structured mesh/grids
1. Introduction
AMReX, a software framework developed and supported
by the U.S. DOE Exascale Computing Project ’s AMReX
Co-Design Center, supports the development of block-structured adaptive mesh re ﬁnement (AMR) algorithms
for solving systems of partial differential equations, insimple or complex geometries, on machines from laptops toexascale architectures. Block-structured AMR provides the
basis for the temporal and spatial discretization strategy for
Exascale Computing Project (ECP) applications in accel-erator design, additive manufacturing, astrophysics, com-bustion, cosmology, multiphase ﬂow, and wind energy. This
suite of applications represents a broad range of differentphysical processes with a wide range of algorithmicrequirements.
Fundamental to block-struc tured AMR algorithms is a
hierarchical representatio n of the solution at multiple
levels of resolution. At each level, the solution is de ﬁned
on the union of data containers at that resolution, each ofwhich represents the solution over a logically rectangularsubregion of the domain. For mesh-based algorithms,AMReX provides support for both explicit and implicitdiscretizations. Support for solving linear systems includes
native geometric multigrid solvers as well the ability to linkto external linear algebra software. For problems that in-clude stiff systems of ordinary differential equations thatrepresent single-point processes such as chemical kineticsor nucleosynthesis, AMReX provides an interface toOrdinary Differential Equation (ODE) solvers provided
by SUNDIALS Hindmarsh et al. (2005) . AMReX sup-
ports algorithms that utilize particles and/or particle –mesh
operations to represent component physical processes.AMReX also provides support for embedded boundary(EB) (cut cell) representations of complex geometries. Bothparticles and EB representations introduce additional ir-regularity and complexity in the way data are stored and
1CCSE, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
2NERSC, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
Corresponding author:
Weiqun Zhang, Center for Computational Sciences and Engineering,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, MS 50A-3111, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.Email: weiqunzhang@lbl.gov

operated on, requiring special attention in the presence of
dynamically changing hierarchical mesh structures andAMR time-stepping approaches.
There are a number of different open-source AMR
frameworks; see the 2014 survey article by Dubey et al.
(2014a) for a discussion of these frameworks and references
to both the frameworks and application codes that use them.
Most of these frameworks originally used MPI for basic
parallelization where data are distributed to MPI ranks witheach rank performing operations on its own data. Morerecently, most of these frameworks, including BoxLib, theprecursor to AMReX, introduced some level of hierarchicalparallelism through the use of OpenMP directives. How-ever, as we have been moving toward the exascale era, nodearchitectures have been changing dramatically, with the
advent and increasingly widespread use of many-core
CPU-only nodes and hybrid nodes with GPU accelera-tors. Further complicating the landscape is the fact thatdifferent types of GPUs have different programmingmodels. A key driver behind the development of AMReX isto provide a high-performance framework for applicationsto run on a variety of current- and next-generation systemswithout substantial architecture-speci ﬁc code development/
modiﬁcation costs for each new platform.
In the remainder of the article, we ﬁrst de ﬁne what we
mean by block-structured AMR followed by a discussion ofthe basic design issues considered in the development ofAMReX. We then discuss the ECP applications that areusing AMReX and brie ﬂy describe their computational
requirements. Next, we discuss the data structures used todescribe the grid hierarchy and the data containers used to
hold mesh data. We then discuss additional features of
AMReX needed to support particle-based algorithms andEB discretizations. We also discuss linear solvers needed forimplicit discretizations. We close with a brief discussion ofsoftware engineering practice and some concludingremarks.
2. Block-structured AMR
In the context of this article, block-structured AMR isconsidered to have the following de ﬁning features:
1. The mesh covering the computational domain is
decomposed spatially into structured patches (grids)that each covers a logically rectangular region of thedomain.
2. Patches with the same mesh spacing are disjoint; the
union of such patches is referred to as a level. Onlythe coarsest level ( l= 0) is required to cover the
domain, though ﬁner levels can cover it as well.
3. The complete mesh hierarchy on which ﬁeld vari-
ables are de ﬁned is the union of all the levels. Proper
nesting is enforced, that is, the union of grids at levell> 0 is strictly contained within the union of grids at
levell/C01. We note, however, that AMReX does not
impose proper nesting at the individual grid level;that is, a level lgrid can span multiple grids at level
l/C01.
4. The decomposition of the physical region covered by
each level can be different for mesh data versus
particle data; we refer to this as a “dual grid ”
approach.
5. The mesh hierarchy can change dynamically
throughout a simulation.
We note the contrast to block-structured AMR frame-
works that use a quadtree/octree structure, such as FLASH(Fryxell et al., 2000 ;Dubey et al., 2014b ), where the patches
have a uniform size, each grid at level l> 0 has a unique
parent grid at level l/C01, and algorithms are typically
constrained to use the same time step at all levels. We notethat these grid patterns and algorithms are a subset of theAMReX capabilities.
3. Design philosophy
There are two major factors that inform the design of theAMReX framework. First, AMReX should be able tosupport a wide range of multiphysics applications withdifferent performance characteristics. Second, AMReXshould not impose restrictions on how application devel-opers construct their algorithms. Consequently, AMReXmust provide a rich set of tools with suf ﬁcient ﬂexibility that
the software can meet the algorithmic requirements of many
different applications without sacri ﬁcing the performance of
any. To achieve these goals, careful attention has been paidto separating the design of the data structures and basicoperations from the algorithms that use those data struc-tures. The core software components provide the ﬂexibility
to support the exploration, development, and im-plementation of new algorithms that might generate addi-tional performance gains.
The AMReX design allows application developers to
interact with the software at several different levels ofabstraction. It is possible to simply use the AMReX datacontainers and iterators and none of the higher-levelfunctionality. A more popular approach is to use the datastructures and iterators for single- and multilevel operationsbut retain complete control over the time evolution algo-rithm, that is, the ordering of algorithmic components at
each level and across levels. In an alternative approach, the
developer exploits additional functionality in AMReX thatis designed speci ﬁcally to support traditional subcycling-in-
time algorithms. In this approach, stubs are provided for thenecessary operations such as advancing the solution on alevel, correcting coarse grid ﬂuxes with time- and space-
averaged ﬁne grid ﬂuxes, averaging data from ﬁne to coarse,Zhang et al. 509
and interpolating in both space and time from coarse to ﬁne.
This layered design provides users with the ability tohave complete control over their algorithm or to utilizean application template that can provide higher-levelfunctionality.
The other major factor in ﬂuencing the AMReX design is
performance portability. As we enter the exascale era, a
variety of new architectures are being developed with
different capabilities and programming models. Our goal isto isolate applications from any particular architecture andprogramming model without sacri ﬁcing performance. To
achieve this goal, we introduced a lightweight abstractionlayer that effectively hides the details of the architecturefrom the application. This layer provides constructs thatallow the user to specify what operations they want to
perform on a block of data without specifying how those
operations are carried out. AMReX then maps those op-erations onto the hardware at compile time so that thehardware is utilized effectively. For example, on a many-core node, an operation would be mapped onto a tiledexecution model using OpenMP to guarantee good cacheperformance while on a different architecture the sameoperation might be mapped to a kernel launch appropriate to
a particular GPU.
Similar in spirit to the other aspects of the design, ap-
plications are not required to use the AMReX-providedkernel launch functionality. Applications can use OpenMP,OpenACC, or native programming models to implementtheir own kernel launches if desired. Furthermore, as part ofthe AMReX design, speci ﬁc language requirements are not
imposed on users (although much of the AMReX internal
performance portability capability requires C++). Speci ﬁ-
cally, the project supports application modules written inFortran, C, C++ or other languages that can be linked toC++.
4. AMReX-based ECP applications
Seven ECP application projects, as well as numerous non-
ECP projects, include codes based on AMReX. Here, we
brieﬂy review the ECP applications and how they use
AMReX.
WarpX ( Vay et al., 2018 ) is a multilevel electromagnetic
particle-in-cell (PIC) code for simulation of plasma accel-erators; electrons are modeled as AMReX particles whilethe electric and magnetic ﬁelds are de ﬁned (at edges and
faces, respectively) on the hierarchical mesh. The PIC al-
gorithm heavily leverages the particle –mesh functionality
with particle data deposited onto the mesh and mesh datainterpolated to particles in every time step.
The Castro ( Almgren et al., 2010 ) code for compressible
astrophysics is part of the ExaStar project and uses the built-in support for subcycling in time. The basic time advanceincludes explicit hydrodynamics, solution of the Poissonequation for self-gravity, and time integration of stiff nu-
clear reaction networks.
Nyx ( Almgren et al., 2013 ) also solves the equations of
compressible hydrodynamics with self-gravity but herecoupled with an N-body representation of dark matter in thecontext of an evolving universe. Dark matter particles in-teract with each other and with the mesh-based ﬂuid only
through gravitational forcing. Time integration of the stiff
source terms is typically done with a call to CVODE, asolver provided by the SUNDIALS project ( Hindmarsh
et al., 2005 ), one of the ECP Software Technology projects.
The MFiX-Exa ( MFiX-Exa, 2020 ) multiphase modeling
code also heavily leverages both the mesh and particlefunctionality; the particles represent solid particles within agas. Unlike the applications mentioned above, in MFiX-
Exa, particle/particle interactions play a major role in the
dynamics. Typical MFiX-Exa applications take place insidenon-rectangular geometries represented using the EB datastructures. Multigrid solvers are used to solve for the dy-namic pressure ﬁeld in a projection formulation and for the
implicit treatment of viscous terms.
The compressible combustion code, PeleC ( PeleC, 2020 ),
and the low Mach number combustion modeling code,
PeleLM ( PeleLM, 2020 ), are both based on AMReX. Both
use the EB methodology to represent the problem geometryand possibly CVODE to evolve the chemical kinetics. LikeMFiX-Exa, PeleLM uses the multigrid solvers to solve forthe dynamic pressure ﬁeld in a projection formulation and
for the semi-implicit treatment of viscous terms. Particlescan be used both as tracer particles and to represent sprays.
The ExaWind project combines AMR-Wind ( AMR-Wind,
2020), an AMReX-based multilevel structured ﬂow solver
with Nalu-Wind, an unstructured ﬂow solver. The ﬂow
solvers are coupled using an overset mesh approach handledby the TIOGA library. Both Nalu-Wind and AMR-Windsolve the incompressible Navier –Stokes equations with
additional physics to model atmospheric boundary layers. Ina wind-farm simulation, Nalu-Wind is designed to resolvethe complicated geometry and ﬂow near the wind turbine
blades, while AMR-Wind solves for the ﬂow in the full
domain away from the turbines.
One of the codes in the ExaAM project ( ExaAM, 2020 ),
TruchasPBF, is based on AMReX. TruchasPBF is a ﬁnite
volume code that models free surface ﬂows with heat
transfer, phase change, and species diffusion. TruchasPBFis used for continuum modeling of melt pool physics.
5. Creating and managing the
grid hierarchy
Block-structured AMR codes de ﬁne the solution across a
hierarchical representation of different levels of resolution.At each level, the solution is de ﬁned over a region repre-
sented by the union of a collection of nonoverlapping510 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
rectilinear regions with associated data containers. These
data containers can hold mesh data, particles, informationdescribing an EB geometry, or other data used to representthe solution. In this section, we introduce the data structuresthat describe the grid hierarchy and how the hierarchy isgenerated.
5.1. Basic data structures
AMReX uses a number of data abstractions to represent thegrids at a given level. The basic objects are as follows:
1.IntVect : a dimension-sized list of integers rep-
resenting a spatial location in index space. The use ofIntVect allows the basic grid description to be
dimension-independent.
2.Box: a logically rectangular (or rectangular cuboid,
in 3D) region of cells de ﬁned by its upper and lower
corner indices. A Box also has an IndexType ,a
specialized IntVect that describes whether the
indices refer to cell centers, faces, edges or nodes.
3.BoxArray : a collection of Boxes nonintersecting
at the same resolution. Each individual Box in a
BoxArray can be stored, accessed, copied, and
moved independently of the other boxes.
4.DistributionMapping : a vector that lists the
MPI rank that the data associated with each Box in a
BoxArray will be de ﬁned on.
In an AMReX application, the BoxArray and
DistributionMapping at each level describe how the
data at that level are decomposed and where they are al-
located. The relationship between boxes at different levels,thus resolution different levels, is de ﬁn e db yar e ﬁnement
ratio. In a single application, the re ﬁnement ratio between
any two levels may differ, but it must be prescribed atrun time. To facilitate ef ﬁcient communication across MPI
ranks, the BoxArray andDistributionMapping at
each level, also referred to as the metadata, are stored on
every MPI rank.
AMReX also includes distinct objects commonly used to
describe other critical simulation parameters. Of particularimportance are as follows:
1.Geometry : stores and calculates parameters that
describe the relationship between index space andphysical space. The Geometry object holds in-
formation that is the same at all levels, such as
periodicity and coordinate system, but also level-speciﬁc information such as mesh size. A multilevel
AMReX-based simulation will typically have aGeometry object at each level.
2.BCRec : a multidimensional integer array that de-
ﬁnes the physical boundary conditions for thedomain. A multilevel AMReX-based simulation will
only need one BCRec .
5.2. Regridding and load balancing
AMR algorithms dynamically change the resolution of the
mesh to re ﬂect the changing requirements of the problem
being solved. AMReX provides support for the creation of
new grids or the modi ﬁcation of existing grids (regridding)
at levell+ 1 and above at user-speci ﬁed intervals. To do so,
an error estimate is used to tag individual cells above a giventolerance at level l, where the error is de ﬁned by user-
speciﬁed routines. Typical error criteria might include ﬁrst
or second derivatives of the state variables or some type ofapplication-speci ﬁc heuristic.
The tagged cells are grouped into rectangular grids at
levellusing the clustering algorithm given in Berger and
Rigoutsos (1991) . These rectangular patches are re ﬁned to
form the grids at level l+ 1. Large patches are broken into
smaller patches for distribution to multiple processors basedon a user-speci ﬁedmax_grid_size parameter; AMReX
enforces that no grid is longer in any direction thanmax_grid_size cells. AMReX also provides the option
to enforce that the dimensions of each newly created grid is
divisible by a speci ﬁc factor, blocking_factor ; this is
used to improve multigrid ef ﬁciency for single-level solves.
(In this case, the grid creation algorithm is slightly different;we refer the interested reader to the AMReX documenta-tion: Zhang et al. (2019 ;2020) .) The re ﬁnement process is
repeated until either an error tolerance criterion is satis ﬁed
or a speci ﬁed maximum level is reached. Finally, we impose
the proper nesting requirements that enforce that level l+1
is strictly contained in level lexcept at physical boundaries.
A similar procedure is used to generate the initial gridhierarchy. Once created, the BoxArray of new grids at
each level is broadcast to every MPI rank.
When creating a DistributionMapping associated
with a BoxArray at a level, it is important to equidistribute
the work to the nodes. Some type of cost function that is
assumed or prescribed by the user is used to estimate the work.
The default methodology assumes a cost function propor-tional to the number of cells per grid and implements aMorton-ordering space- ﬁlling curve (SFC) algorithm to de ﬁne
an initial data distribution across the MPI ranks. Once datahave been allocated, applications can calculate an improvedDistributionMapping throughout run time based on
any desired load-balancing parameter, such as data size, an
estimation of the work, a user-de ﬁned cost function, or a timer.
Prescribed cost functions are often less than optimal. For
GPUs, both CUPTI timers and ef ﬁcient hand-written timers
have been developed to accurately capture device kernel
times respective to the device. This eliminates launch delaysand other latencies from the resulting timer that preventaccurate distribution.Zhang et al. 511
AMReX provides a knapsack algorithm in addition to a
SFC algorithm for load-balancing simulations across MPIranks. The knapsack algorithm creates the most optimaldistribution possible with respect to the load-balancingparameter, while the SFC tries to build contiguous spatialregions with near uniform costs (see Figure 1 for an il-
lustration of how the two approaches distribute data).
6. Mesh data and iterators
At the core of the AMReX software is a ﬂexible set of data
structures that can be used to represent block-structuredmesh data in a distributed memory environment. Multileveldata on the AMR grid hierarchy are stored in a vector ofsingle-level data structures. In this section, we describe the
data containers for mesh data. We also discuss operations
supported on these data structures including iterators foroperations at a level, a communications layer to handleghost cell exchange and data distribution and tools foroperations between levels.
6.1. Containers for mesh data
The basic single-level data structure in AMReX is a C ++
class template, FabArray <FAB> , a distributed data
structure for a collection of FABs, one for each grid. The
template parameter FAB is usually a multidimensional array
class such as FArrayBox forﬂoating point numbers. Most
AMReX applications use a specialization of FabArray ,called a MultiFab , that is used for storing ﬂoating point
data on single-level grids. However, FabArray can also be
used to store integers, complex numbers, or any user-deﬁned data structures.
AFArrayBox contains the Box that de ﬁnes its valid
region and a pointer to a multidimensional array. For three-dimensional calculations, the data accessed by the pointer in
aFArrayBox or its base class BaseFab <T> is a four-
dimensional array. The ﬁrst three dimensions correspond to
the spatial dimensions; the fourth dimension is for com-ponents. An important feature of a FArrayBox is that extra
space is allocated to provide space for ghost cell data, whichis often required for ef ﬁcient stencil operations. Ghost cell
data are typically ﬁlled by interpolating from coarser data,
copying from other FArrayBox es at the same level, or by
imposing boundary conditions outside the domain. The data
in aFArrayBox (including ghost cells) are stored in a
contiguous chunk of memory with the layout of the so-called struct of arrays (SoA) (i.e., struct of 3D arrays, one foreach component).
AMReX provides a class template, Array4 <T> , that
can be used to access the data in a FArrayBox or other
similar objects. This class does not own the data and is not
responsible for allocating or freeing memory; it simply
provides a reference to the data. This property makes itsuitable for being captured by a C++ lambda functionwithout memory management concerns. The Array4 class
has an operator() that allows the user to access it with
Fortran multidimensional array like syntax.
Figure 1. Comparison of the data distribution from the knapsack load-balancing algorithm (left) and space- ﬁlling curve (right). Image
courtesy of Michael Rowan.512 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
The SoA layout of FArrayBox is typically a good
choice for most applications because it provides unit stridememory access for common operations. Nevertheless, somealgorithms (e.g., high-order discontinuous Galerkinmethods) perform computations that involve relatively largematrices within a single element, and an array of struct(AoS) is a better layout for performance. This can be
achieved with BaseFab <T> , where Tis a struct. For
example, one can use amrex::GpuArray ,aﬁxed size
array class portable to host and device, as the struct, andaccess the data in Array4 <GpuArray <Real,2 >>a
at cell (i,j,k) witha(i,j,k)[ 0]anda(i,j,k)[ 1]
as opposed to the SoA access a(i,j,k,0) anda(i,j,
k,1) . Note that in this example, the choice between AoS
and SoA is made a priori , not at compile or run time. This
explicit memory layout gives the users transparency re-
garding the memory access pattern, and makes it easy forinteroperability with other languages such as Fortran. If,however, a different ordering is needed to achieve goodperformance on different hardware, a thin abstraction layerPolymorphicArray4 is provided to allow the users to
access both SoA and AoS with operator()(int i,
int j, int k, int n) where the choice is made at
compile time.
6.2. Iterators
AMReX employs an owner-computes rule to operate on
single AMR level data structures such as MultiFab s and
FabArray s. A data iterator, MFIter , is provided to loop
over the single box data structures such as FArrayBox s
andBaseFab si na MultiFab /FabArray with the
option of logical tiling. The iterator can be used toaccess data from multiple MultiFab s/FabArray s
built on the same BoxArray with the same
DistributionMapping .
For CPU computing, tiling provides the bene ﬁt of cache
blocking and parallelism for OpenMP threading. Theiterator performs a loop transformation, thereby improving
data locality and relieving the user from the burden of
manually tiling ( Zhang et al., 2016 ). For GPU computing,
tiling is turned off by default because exposing more ﬁne-
grained parallelism at the cell level and reducing kernellaunch overhead are more important than cache blocking.
6.3. Operations on a level
Many AMReX-based applications use stencil operationsthat require access to the data on neighboring and/or nearbycells. When that data lie outside the valid region of thepatch being operated on, pre- ﬁlling ghost cells is an ef ﬁcient
way to optimize communication. The Boxes stored in
FabArrays determine the “valid”region. The multidi-
mensional array associated with each FArrayBox covers aregion larger than the “valid”region by nGrow cells on the
low and high sides in each direction, where nGrow is
speciﬁed when the MultiFab is created. AMReX pro-
vides basic communication functions for ghost cell ex-changes of data in the same FabArray . It also provides
routines for copying data between two different FabArrays
at the same level. These routines use the metadata discussed
in the previous section to compute where the data are lo-
cated. Data between different MPI ranks are organized intobuffers to reduce the number of messages that need to besent. Techniques to optimize the communication are dis-cussed in more detail below.
6.4. Operations between levels
AMReX also provides functions for common communi-cation patterns associated with operations between adjacentlevels. The three most common types of inter-level oper-ations are interpolation from coarse data to ﬁne, restriction
ofﬁne data to coarse, and explicit re ﬂuxing at coarse/ ﬁne
boundaries.
Interpolation is needed to ﬁllﬁne level ghost cells that
are inside the domain but cannot be ﬁlled by copying from
another patch at the same level and is also needed in re-
gridding to ﬁll regions at the ﬁne level that were not pre-
viously contained in ﬁne level patches. Note that to avoid
unnecessary communication, we only obtain coarse data tointerpolate to the ﬁne level when ﬁne data are not available.
Restriction is typically used to synchronize data betweenlevels, replacing data at a coarser level with an average orinjection of ﬁne data where possible. A number of inter-
polation and restriction operations are provided within
AMReX for cell-centered, face-centered, or nodal data; adeveloper can also create their own application-speci ﬁc
interpolation or restriction operation. For these opera-tions, necessary communication is done ﬁrst and then
interpolation/restriction is done locally, making itstraightforward for users to provide their own functions.AMReX only needs to know the width of the stencil to
gather the necessary amount of data.
Reﬂuxing effectively synchronizes explicit ﬂuxes across
coarse/ ﬁne boundaries and is relevant only for cell-centered
data being updated with face-centered ﬂuxes. Specialized
data structures, referred to as FluxRegisters , hold the
differences between ﬂuxes on a coarse level and time- and
space-averaged ﬁne level ﬂuxes. Once the coarse and ﬁne
level have reached the same simulation time, the data in
theFluxRegisters a r eu s e dt ou p d a t et h ed a t ai nt h e
coarse cells immediately next to the coarse- ﬁne bound-
aries but not covered by ﬁne cells. This operation is
common in multilevel algorithms with explicit ﬂux up-
dates. FluxRegisters are also used to hold data needed
to synchronize implicit discretizations of parabolic and el-liptic equations.Zhang et al. 513
6.5. Communication
AMReX grids can have a complicated layout, which makes
the communication metadata needed for ghost cell exchangeand inter-level communication nontrivial to construct.AMReX uses a hash-based algorithm to perform intersec-
tions between Boxes. The hash is constructed in an O(N)
operation, where Nis the number of global Boxes, and
cached for later use. It then takes only O(n) operations to
construct the list of source and destination Boxes forcommunication, where nis the number of local Boxes.
Furthermore, the communication metadata is also cachedfor reuse.
AMReX supports GPU-aware MPI on GPU machines, if
available. To reduce latency, the data needed to be com-
municated through MPI are aggregated into communicationbuffers. For packing the buffer, we need to copy data fromslices of multidimensional arrays to the one-dimensionalbuffer, whereas for unpacking the buffer, data are copiedfrom the one-dimensional buffer to slices of multidimen-sional array. The straightforward approach of the copying isto launch a GPU kernel for each slice. Unfortunately, this
simple approach is very expensive because there are often
hundreds of very small GPU kernels. In AMReX, we haveimplemented a fusing mechanism that merges all thesesmall GPU kernels into one kernel, thus signi ﬁcantly re-
ducing kernel launch overhead.
7. Performance portability
Performance portability across different architectures has
been identi ﬁed as a major concern for the ECP. Most
AMReX-based application codes either use or have plans touse a variety of platforms, including individual worksta-tions, many-core HPC platforms such as NERSC ’s Cori,
and accelerator-based supercomputers such as Summit andFrontier at OLCF and Aurora at ALCF. In this section, wediscuss various features that enable applications to obtainhigh performance on different architectures without sub-
stantial recoding.
7.1. On-node parallelism
AMReX is based on a hierarchical parallelism model. At a
coarse-grained level, the basic AMReX paradigm is basedon distribution of one or more patches of data to each nodewith an owner-computes rule to allocate tasks betweennodes. For many use cases, a node is divided into a small
number of MPI ranks and the coarse-grained distribution is
over MPI ranks. For example, on a system with six GPUsper node, the node would typically have six MPI ranks. Thenodes on modern architectures all have hardware for parallelexecution within the node, but there is considerable vari-ability in the details of intranode parallel hardware. For codeexecuting on CPUs, AMReX supports logical tiling for
cache reuse using OpenMP threading. Tile size can beadjusted at run time to improve cache performance; tile sizecan also vary between operations. AMReX includes both astandard synchronous strategy for scheduling tiles as well asan asynchronous scheduling methodology. AMReX alsoprovides extensive support for kernel launching on GPU
accelerators (using C++ lambda functions) and for the ef-
fective use of managed memory that allows users to controlwhere their data are stored. While much of the internalAMReX functionality currently uses CUDA/HIP/DPC++for maximum performance on current machines, AMReXsupports the use of CUDA, HIP, DPC++, OpenMP,or OpenACC in AMReX-based applications. Speci ﬁc
architecture-dependent aspects of the software for GPUs
are highly localized, enabling AMReX to easily support
other GPU architectures.
To isolate application code from the nuances of a par-
ticular architecture, AMReX provides an abstraction layerconsisting of a number of ParallelFor looping constructs,similar to those provided by Kokkos ( Carter Edwards et al.,
2014 ) or RAJA ( Beckingsale et al., 2019 ) but tailored to the
needs of block-structured AMR applications. Users provide
a loop body as a C++ lambda function that de ﬁnes the task
to be performed over a set of cells or particles. The lambdafunction is then used in a kernel with a launching mech-anism provided by CUDA, HIP, or DPC++ for GPU orstandard C++ for CPU. The details of how to loop over theset of objects, and in particular how to map iterations of theloop to hardware resources such as GPU threads, are hiddenfrom users. By separating these details from the loop body,
the same user code can run on multiple platforms. In ad-
dition to 1D loops, users can also specify 3D and 4D loopsusing by passing in an amrex::Box as the loop bounds.
Internally, the ParallelFor construct in AMReX is
implemented using CUDA, HIP, and DPC++ as the parallelbackend. A key difference between AMReX ’sParallelFor
functions and those provided by Kokkos or RAJA is theway OpenMP is handled. When using multi-threading, the
AMReX ParallelFor does not include any OpenMP
directives (it does, however, incorporate vectorizationthrough #pragma simd). Rather, OpenMP is incorporated attheMFIter level, as shown in Listing 1 . When this code is
compiled to execute on CPUs with OpenMP, the MFIter
loop includes tiling and the ParallelFor translates to a
serial loop over the cells in a tile. However, when compilingfor GPU platforms, tiling at the MFIter level is switched
off, and the ParallelFor translates to a GPU kernel
launch.
7.2. Parallel reductions
Parallel reductions are commonly needed in scienti ﬁc
computing. For example, in an explicit hydrodynamics514 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
solver, one needs to calculate the time step by examining the
CFL constraint in each cell and then ﬁnding the minimum
over all cells. Similarly, in linear solvers, one needs to
measure norms of the global residual. Performing reduc-tions ef ﬁciently in parallel in a way that is portable between
CPU and various GPU platforms is nontrivial. To aid in thistask, AMReX provides generic functions for performingreduction operations in a performance-portable way. Thesefunctions can be used at the level of contiguous arrays bypassing in data pointers, or they can work on higher-level
AMReX data containers to, for example, perform reductions
over all the cells in a MultiFab , or all the particles in a
ParticleContainer (see Section 8 for more infor-
mation about particles in AMReX).
A feature of the AMReX implementation of parallel
reduce is that we provide an API for performing multiplereductions in one pass using a ReduceTuple data type
(seeListing 2 for a code example). The code in this snippet
computes the Sum, Min, and Max of all the Real data in a
MultiFab , as well as the Sum of all the int data in an
iMultiFab ( Long is used in the reduction to avoid over-
ﬂow). Any arbitrary combination of data types and re-
duction operators can be applied in this manner. Whenrunning on GPUs, all these operations would be done in asingle kernel launch.Note that the code in the above snippet does not perform
MPI-level reductions. If that is needed, for convenience AMReXprovides wrappers such as ParallelDescriptor::
ReduceRealMin and ParallelDescriptor::
ReduceLongSum , so that the same code can work whether
or not it is compiled with MPI support.
7.3. Memory management
Allocating and deallocating memory can be extremelycostly, especially on CPU –GPU platforms where data need
to be copied back and forth between multiple memoryspaces. Furthermore, different architectures support dif-ferent types of memory models. AMReX includes a varietyof memory pools, referred to as Arena s, to improve the
performance of memory activities and properly track and
handle memory allocations. Arena s allocate a large block
of memory during initialization and provide data pointers topieces of that pre-allocated space as needed. This minimizesexpensive allocation calls, provides a portability wrapperaround memory operations, and allows tracking of memoryuse across a simulation. In most cases, Arena s are used
automatically according to AMReX ’s memory strategy.
For example, when creating a new MultiFab , the mesh
data are allocated with the default AMReX Arena ,
The_Arena , unless otherwise speci ﬁed by the user.
Based on the system architecture, AMReX prede ﬁnes an
Arena for each available memory type during initializa-
tion. A variety of Arena types are provided, including slab
allocation, buddy memory and best- ﬁt, and they can be
targeted to any desired memory type, which currently in-
cludes CPU memory, pinned memory, GPU device memory,
and GPU managed memory. Users can build their ownArena s, either to track a particular subset of memory usage
or to manage memory according to a user-speci ﬁc strategy.
AMReX also provides specialized std::vector varia-
tions that track particle memory use as well as implement animproved memory allocation strategy.
AMReX ’s default memory management strategy for
CPU–GPU systems is based on placing ﬂoating point data
on the device and moving it as little as possible. Using thisparadigm, metadata is usually allocated to the CPU to fa-cilitate ef ﬁcient host side solution control and pinned
memory is used for temporary data that will be transferredbetween the host and device. This memory managementstrategy is implemented automatically, and users only in-teract directly with Arena s when it becomes necessary to
deviate from this strategy. AMReX Arena s include a ro-
bust design API, so manually controlling deviations issimple. For example, by default mesh and particle, data areallocated in managed memory, due to its convenience todevelopers and negligible overhead. But, this default can beoverridden for any speci ﬁcMultiFab ,iMultiFab ,o r
ParticleContainer object during the object ’sListing 1. Example of ParallelFor. This code can be compiled to
run on CPU with OpenMP or GPU with CUDA, HIP, or DPC++.
Listing 2. Performing parallel reduce on mixed data types.
Zhang et al. 515
constructions. The default memory pool can also be
changed to traditional device memory through a run-timeﬂag. Additional run-time options include setting the initial
allocation sizes of the Arena s and aborting if device
memory is oversubscribed, allowing users to adjust theAMReX memory management paradigm for their uniqueneeds.
7.4. Example
As an illustration of the performance of AMReX on a simpleexample, we carried out a weak scaling study on Summit(https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/summit/ ) using an explicit hy-
drodynamics code for solving the compressible Eulerequations. The time-stepping strategy uses a second-order
Runge –Kutta method on each level with subcycling in time
between levels. A piecewise linear reconstruction methodwith a monotonized central slope limiter is used to ex-trapolate the primitive variables to cell faces, and an ap-proximate Riemann solver based on the two-shockapproximation is employed to compute ﬂuxes. We have
performed a series of tests simulating the Rayleigh –Taylor
instability. The runs have a base level and two re ﬁned levels,
each with a re ﬁnement ratio of 2. On each node, there are
128 × 128 × 256 cells on level 0. For multi-node runs, thedomain is replicated in the xandydirections. In the initial
model, levels 1 and 2 occupy 12.5% and 6.25% of thedomain, respectively. Regridding is performed every 2 stepson each ﬁne level.
Figure 2 shows the results of a series of runs on Summit.
We de ﬁne the speedup as the time per step using CPUs only
divided by the time per step using 6 GPUs per node. For
single node runs, there is a ∼60× speedup for the com-
putational kernels themselves and a 19× overall speedupwith GPUs. For the runs using 4096 nodes (24,576 GPUs), a
4.4× speedup is obtained. The reduced speedup is due toincreased communication costs relative to compute costswhen using GPU accelerators; the effect is so large herebecause relatively little ﬂoating point work is needed to
advance the solution in each cell.
8. Particles
In addition to mesh data, many AMReX applications useparticles to model at least some portion of the physicalsystem under consideration. At their simplest, particles canbe used as passive tracers that follow a ﬂowﬁeld, tracking
changes to properties such as chemical composition but notfeeding back into the mesh-based solution. In most cases,
however, the particles in AMReX applications actively
inﬂuence the evolution of the mesh variables through, for
example, drag or gravitational forces. Finally, particles candirectly in ﬂuence each other without an intervening mesh,
for example, through particle –particle collisions or DSMC-
style random interactions. AMReX provides data con-tainers, iterators, parallel communication routines, and othertools for implementing the above operations on particle
data.
Particles present a different set of challenges than
structured grid data for several reasons. First, particle dataare inherently dynamic, even between AMR regriddingoperations; particles are constantly changing their positions.Additionally, the connectivity of particle data (e.g., nearestneighbors) is not as simple and in general cannot be inferredfrom metadata alone —rather, the particle data itself must be
examined and processed. Finally, data access patterns are
more irregular, in that (unless special sorting is employed)particles that are next to each other in memory do notnecessarily interact with the same set of grid cells or with thesame set of other particles. In what follows, we describe theparticle data structures and supporting operations providedby AMReX and how they help users manage thesechallenges.
8.1. Data structures and iterators
AMReX provides a ParticleContainer class for
storing particle data in a distributed fashion. Particles inAMReX are associated with a block-structured mesh re-ﬁnement hierarchy based on their position coordinates.
Internally, this hierarchy is represented by a Vector
<BoxArray > that describes the grid patches on each level,
as well as a Vector <DistributionMapping >t h a t
describes how those grids are distributed onto MPI ranks.Particles are then assigned to levels, grids, and MPI ranksspatially, by binning them on a given level using theappropriate cell spacing and physical domain offset.Storing the particles in thi s fashion allows them to be
Figure 2. Weak scaling study of a compressible hydrodynamics
solver. Time per step is shown for a series of GPU and CPU
runs. The adaptive mesh re ﬁnement runs have three total levels.516 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
accessed and iterated over level-by-level, which is con-
venient for many AMR time-stepping approaches. Ad-ditionally, splitting particles onto grids and then assigning
multiple grids per MPI rank allows load balancing toperform by exchanging grids among the processes until aneven number of particles is achieved. Note also that al-though particles in AMReX always live on a set of AMR
grids, this does not need to the same set of grids that is
used to store the mesh data; in principle, the particle gridscan be different and can be load balanced separately (seeSection 8.7 for more information).
Once the particles are stored in the ParticleContainer ,
they can be iterated over in parallel in a similar manner totheMFIter for mesh data (see Listing 3 for a code sample).
Speci ﬁcally, when an MPI rank executes a ParIter loop,
it executes the loop body once for each grid (or tile, if tiling
is enabled, see Section 8.2 ) on the level in question. By
launching the same compute kernel on each grid, all theparticles on the level can be updated in a manner thatseparates the numerical operations from the details of thedomain decomposition. Inside the ParIter , the same
ParallelFor constructs can be used to operate on par-
ticles in a portable way. The 1D version of ParallelFor ,
which takes a number of items to iterate over instead of a Box,
is particularly useful for particle data.
8.2. Data layout
AMReX supports particle types that are arbitrary mixturesof real (i.e., ﬂoating point data of either single or double
precision) and integer components. For example, a particle
used to represent a star in a 3D N-body calculation might
have four real components, a mass, and three velocitycomponents, while a particle that a represents an ion in afuel cell might have an integer component that tracks itsionization level. In general, the particles in a given containermust all have the same type, but there is no limit to thenumber of different types of ParticleContainers that
can be in the same simulation. For example, a single cal-
culation might have one type of particle that representscollisionless dark matter, another that represents neutrinos,
and another that represents active galactic nuclei, each ofwhich would model different physics and exhibit differentbehavior.
There is also the question of how the various components
for the particles on a single grid should be laid out inmemory. In an Array-of-Structs (AoS) representation, all the
components for particle 1 are next to each other, followed by
all the components for particle 2, and so on. In a Struct-of-Arrays (SoA) representation, all the data over all the par-ticles for component 1 would be next to other, followed byall the data for component 2, and so on. AMReX allowsusers to specify a mixture of AoS and SoA data whendeﬁning the particle type. For example, consider an ap-
plication where, in addition to position and velocity, each
particle stores the mass fraction of a large number of
chemical components. For many operations, such as ad-vancing the particle positions in time or assigning particlesto the proper grid in the AMR hierarchy, the values of thechemical concentration are irrelevant. If all of these com-ponents were stored in the particle struct, the data for theposition and velocity of all the particles would be spread outin memory, resulting in an inef ﬁcient use of cache for these
common operations. By separating out these components
from the core particle struct, we can avoid reading them intocache for operations in which they are not needed.
The AMReX particle containers also support a tiling
option. When tiling is enabled, instead of each grid havingits own separate set of particle data structures, the grids willbe further subdivided into tiles with a run time –speciﬁed
size. Unlike with mesh data, with particle data, the tiles are
not just logical, they actually change the way the data are
laid out in memory, with each tile getting its own set ofstd::vector -like data structures. This tiling strategy can
make working sets smaller and more cache-friendly, as wellas enable the use of OpenMP for particle –mesh deposition
operations, in which race conditions need to be considered(seeSection 8.4 for more information).
8.3. Particle communication
There are two main parallel communication patterns that
arise when implementing particle methods with AMReX.Theﬁrst is redistribution. Suppose that at a given time in a
simulation, the particles are all associated with the correctlevel, grid, and MPI rank. The particle positions are thenupdated according to some time-stepping procedure. At
their new positions, the particles may no longer be assigned
to the correct location in the AMR hierarchy. The Re-
distribute() method in AMReX takes care of as-
signing the correct level, grid, and tile to each particle andmoving it to the correct place in the ParticleContainer ,
including any necessary MPI communication. We providetwo forms of Redistribute() , one in which theListing 3. Example of ParIter loop.
Zhang et al. 517
particles have only moved a ﬁnite distance from the
“correct ”grids and thus are only exchanged between
neighboring MPI ranks, and another where the particlescan in principle move between any two ranks in the MPIcommunicator. The former is the version most often usedduring time evolution, while the latter is mostly useful afterinitialization, regridding, o r performing a load-balancing
operation.
The process of particle/grid assignment is done as fol-
lows. First, consider a single level. Assigning a particle to agrid reduces to (1) binning the particle using the level ’s cell
spacing and (2) identifying the box in the BoxArray that
contains the associated cell. Internally, this operation isimplemented using a uniform binning strategy to avoid adirect search over all the boxes on the level. By binning
boxes using the maximum box size as the bin size, only
neighboring bins need to be searched to ﬁnd the possible
intersections for a given cell. Additionally, this operationcan be performed purely on the GPU by using a ﬂattened
map data structure to store the binned BoxArray .
To extend this operation to multiple levels, we consider
each level in a loop, from ﬁnest to coarsest. Usually, we
associate the particles with the ﬁnest level possible. The
exception is when subcycling in time is involved. In this
case, we provide the option to exclude certain levels fromtheRedistribute() operation and to leave the particles
alone if they are less than a speci ﬁed number of cells outside
the coarse/ ﬁne boundary.
The second communication pattern that comes up for
particle data is the halo pattern, similar to ﬁlling ghost cells
for mesh data. In this operation, each grid or tile obtains
copies of particles that are within some number of cells
outside its valid region. This is commonly needed in ap-plications with direct particle –particle collisions since there
is no intermediate grid that can be used to communicateaccumulated values (in contrast to the pattern described inSection 8.4 ). The AMReX terminology for these copies of
particles from other grids is NeighborParticles .A s
with Redistribute() , any necessary parallel com-
munication is handled automatically, and when AMReX is
compiled with GPU support, the operation runs entirely onthe device.
When using neighbor particles, it is common to compute
a halo of particles (i.e., identify which particles need to becopied to which other grids) once and then reuse it forseveral time steps before computing a new halo. To enablethis, AMReX separates computing the halo and ﬁlling it
with data for the ﬁrst time (the FillNeighbors opera-
tion) from reusing the existing halo but replacing the datawith the most recent values from the “valid”particles on
other grids (the UpdateNeighbors operation). Addi-
tionally, AMReX provides a SumNeighbors func-
tion that takes data from the ghosted particles and addsthe contribution back to the corresponding “valid ”
particles.
The particle communication routines in AMReX have
been optimized for Summit and can weak scale up to nearlythe full machine. Figure 3 shows the results of a particle
redistribution scaling study on up to 4096 Summit nodes,with and without mesh re ﬁnement. In this test, particles are
initialized uniformly throughout the domain and then
moved in a random direction for 500 time steps, callingRedistribute() after each one. The initial drop in
weak scaling ef
ﬁciency from 1 to ∼16 nodes is due to the
fact that in 3D, the average number of communicationpartners per MPI rank grows until you have ≈27 neighbors
per grid. After this point , the scaling is basically ﬂat
up to 4096 nodes (24,576 MPI tasks). Finally, although
this benchmark tests Redistribute() rather than
FillNeighbors , the two routines share the same un-
derlying communication code, so the scaling performance
of each is similar.
8.4. Particle –mesh operations
Many of the application codes that use AMReX ’s particle
data structures implement some form of the particle –mesh
method, in which quantities are interpolated between theparticle positions and the cells, edges, faces, or nodes of astructured mesh. Example use cases include Lagrangiantracers (in which this interpolation is one-way only), models
Figure 3. Weak scaling study of an AMReX particle
redistribution benchmark on Summit. The x-axis is the number
of nodes, while the y-axis shows parallel ef ﬁciency, that is, the run
time on 1 node divided by the run time on a scaled up version of
the benchmark on Nnodes. The total number of nodes on
Summit is indicated by the red vertical line. All runs used 6 MPI
ranks per node with 1 GPU per MPI rank. Results are shown for
both a 1-level and a 3-level version of the benchmark.518 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
of drag forces between a ﬂuid and colloidal particles, and
electrostatic and electromagnetic PIC schemes.
To perform these operations in a distributed setting, some
type of parallel communication is required. We opt tocommunicate the mesh data rather than the particle data forthese operations because the connectivity of the mesh cellsis simpler, and thus, the operation can be made more ef-
ﬁcient. However, this may not be the best choice when the
particles are very sparse and/or the interpolation stencil isvery wide. Depending on the type and order of interpolationemployed, the mesh data involved in these interpolationsrequire some number of ghost cells to ensure that each gridhas enough data to fully perform the interpolation for theparticles inside it. For mesh-to-particle interpolation, we useFillBoundary to update the ghost cells on each grid
prior to performing the interpolation. For particle-to-mesh
(i.e., deposition), we use the analogous SumBoundary
operation after performing a deposition, which adds thevalues from overlapping ghost cells back to the correspondingvalid cell, ensuring that all the particle ’s contributions are
accounted for. We provide generic, lambda function –based
ParticleToMesh andMeshToParticle functions for
performing general interpolations. Additionally, users can
always write their own MFIter loops to implement these
operations in a more customized way.
For particle-to-mesh interpolation, an additional factor is
that race conditions need to be taken into account whenmultiple CPU or GPU threads are in use. Our approach tothis depends on whether AMReX is compiled for a CPU orGPU platform. When built for CPUs, we use AMReX ’s
tiling infrastructure to assign different tiles to different
OpenMP threads. Each thread then deposits its particles into
a thread-local buffer, for which no atomics are needed. Wethen perform a second reduction step where each tile ’s local
buffer is atomically added to the MultiFab storing the
result of the deposition. For GPUs, no local buffer is used;each thread performs the atomic writes directly into globalmemory. This strategy works surprisingly well for NVIDIAV100 GPUs such as those on Summit, provided that we
periodically sort the particles on each grid to better exploit
the GPU ’s memory hierarchy.
Figure 4 shows the results of a weak scaling study on a
uniform plasma benchmark from the AMReX-using codeWarpX ( Vay et al., 2018 ). Of all AMReX users, WarpX
places the most stress on the particle –mesh operations since
the deposition of current from macro-particles is often thedominant cost. This benchmark also stresses several parallel
communication routines, including particle redistribution,
FillBoundary , and SumBoundary .
Additionally, the WarpX project has identi ﬁed a plasma-
acceleration run as its ECP KPP benchmark. At the time ofthis writing, the ﬁgure of merit from this benchmark
measured on 4263 Summit nodes and extrapolated to thefull machine is over 100 times larger than the baseline,
which was measured using the original Warp code on Cori.
8.5. Particle –particle operations
Another common need in AMReX particle applications, for
example, MFIX-Exa and the ﬂuctuating hydrodynamics
code DISCOS, is to precompute a neighbor list or a set of
possible collision partners for each particle over the next Ntime steps. AMReX provides algorithms for constructingthese lists that run on both the CPU and the GPU based on auser-provided decision function that returns whether a pairof particles belong in each other ’s lists or not. These al-
gorithms employ a spatial binning method similar to thatused in Redistribution that avoids an N
2search over the
particles on a grid. Tools for iterating over neighbor lists are
also provided (see Listing 4 for example code).
8.6. Parallel scan
When running on GPUs, many particle operations can be
expressed in terms of a parallel pre ﬁx sum, which computes
a running tally of the values in an array. For example, a
commonly needed operation is to compute a permutation
array that puts the particles on a grid into a bin-sorted orderbased on some user-speci ﬁc bin size. This array can then be
used to re-order the particles in memory, or it can be useddirectly to access physically nearby particles in an out-of-order fashion. To perform this operation in AMReX, we usea counting sort algorithm, which involves as one of its
Figure 4. Weak scaling study of a WarpX uniform plasma
benchmark on up to 2048 nodes on Summit. The x-axis is the
number of nodes, while the y-axis displays a type of Figure-of-
Merit: the total number of particles advanced per step per ns.
Perfect weak scaling would be indicated by dark dashed lines.
Results are shown for both CPU-only and GPU-accelerated runs.
The CPU-only runs used all 42 cores per compute node, while the
GPU-accelerated runs used all 6 GPUs per node. The overall
speedup from using the accelerators is ≈30 at all problem sizes.Zhang et al. 519
stages an exclusive pre ﬁx sum. Other operations that can be
expressed in terms of a pre ﬁx sum include partitioning the
particles in a grid, various stream compaction operations(ﬁltering, scattering, and gathering), and constructing
neighbor lists.
AMReX provides an implementation of pre ﬁx sum
based on Merrill and Garland (2016) that works with
CUDA, HIP, and DPC++. Our API allows callables to bepassed in that de ﬁne arbitrary functions to be called when
reading in and writing out data (see Listing 5 for an ex-
ample). This allows for the expression of, for example, apartition function that avoids unnecessary memory traf ﬁc
for temporary variables.
Using this scan implementation, AMReX provides tools
for performing the above binning and stream compactionoperations. These tools are used internally in AMReXwhen, for example, redistributing particles or constructingneighbor lists. They are also used by AMReX applications,for example, to implement DSMC-style collisions whereparticles in the same bin undergo random collisions or tomodel a variety of particle creation processes in WarpX,
such as ionization, pair production, and quantum syn-
chrotron radiation.
8.7. Dual grid approach for load balancing
In AMReX-based applications that have both mesh data andparticle data, the mesh work and particle work have very
different requirements for load balancing. Rather than using
a combined work estimate to create the same grids for meshand particle data, AMReX supplies the option to pursuea“dual grid ”approach. With this approach, the mesh(MultiFab ) and particle ( ParticleContainer ) data
are allocated on different BoxArrays with different
DistributionMapping s. This enables separate load-
balancing strategies to be used for the mesh and particlework. An MFiX-Exa simulation, for example, may havevery dense and very dilute particle distributions within thesame domain, while the dominant cost of the ﬂuid
evolution —the linear solver for the projections —is evenly
distributed throughout the domain. The cost of this strategy,of course, is the need to copy mesh data onto temporaryMultiFabs deﬁned on the particle BoxArrays when
mesh –particle communication is required.
9. EB representation
AMReX supports complex geometries with an EB approach
thatﬁts naturally within the block-structured AMR ap-
proach. In this approach, the problem geometry is repre-
sented as an interface that cuts through a regularcomputational mesh as shown in Figure 5 . Thus, although
the computational domain has an irregular shape, the un-derlying computational mesh is uniform at each level of theAMR hierarchy.
9.1. Data structures and algorithms
When an EB is present in the domain, there are three typesof cells: regular, cut, and covered, as seen in Figure 5 .
AMReX provides data structures for accessing EB infor-mation and supports various algorithms and solvers forsolving partial differential equations on AMR grids withcomplex geometries.
The EB information is precomputed and stored in a
distributed database at the beginning of the calculation. It is
available for AMR meshes at each level and for coarsenedmeshes in multigrid solvers. The information includes celltype, volume fraction, volume centroid, face area fractions,and face centroids. For cut cells, the information also in-cludes the centroid, normal, and area of the EB face. Ad-ditionally, there is connectivity information betweenneighboring cells.
The implementation of the EB data structures uses C ++
std::shared_ptr s. Regular data structures such as
MultiFabs andFArrayBox sh a v et h eo p t i o nt os t o r ea
shared copy of the EB data. One can query a FArrayBox
toﬁnd out if it has any cut or covered cells within a given
Box. This allows the user to adapt an existing non-EB code
to support EB by adding support to handle regions withEB. Computations with EB are usually not balanced in
work load. Regions with cut cells are more expensive than
regions with only regular cel ls, whereas the completely
covered regions have no work. Applications can measurethe wallclock time spent in different regions and use thatListing 4. Iterating over particles in a neighbor list.
Listing 5. API for Pre ﬁxSum.
520 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
information for load balancing when regridding is
performed.
Numerical algorithms that use an EB typically use
specialized stencils in cells containing and near theboundary; in particular, they may pay special attention to the
treatment of the solution in “small cells ”that can arise when
the problem domain is intersected with the mesh.
For example, due to the stability constraint for cut cells
with very small volume fractions, EB-aware algorithmsoften need to redistribute part of the update from small cutcells to their neighbors. Furthermore, to maintain conser-vation when relevant, both the ﬂuxes and redistribution
corrections at AMR coarse/ ﬁne boundaries need to be
synchronized. AMReX provides a class EBFluxRegister
for re ﬂuxing in solvers for hyperbolic conservation laws.
AMReX also provides EB-aware interpolation functions fordata on different AMR levels.
9.2. Geometry generation
AMReX provides an implicit function approach for gen-erating the geometry information. In this approach, there is
an implicit function that describes the surface of the em-
bedded object. It returns a positive value, a negative value,or zero, for a given position inside the body, inside the ﬂuid,
or on the boundary, respectively. Implicit functions forvarious simple shapes such as boxes, cylinders, and spheres,as well as a spline-based approach, are provided. Further-more, basic operations in constructive solid geometry(CSG) such as union, intersection, and difference are used to
combine objects together. Geometry transformations (e.g.,
rotation and translation) can also be applied to these objects.Figure 6 shows an example of geometry generated with
CSG from simple shapes using the implicit function de ﬁned
inListing 6 . Besides the implicit function –based approach,
an application code can also use its own approach togenerate geometry information and then store it in AM-
ReX’s EB database.
9.3. Mesh pruning
When the simulation domain is contained by EB surfaces,
“mesh pruning ”can reduce the memory required by
eliminating fully covered grids at each level (i.e., grids thatare fully outside of the region in which the solution will be
computed) from the BoxArray at that level. As long as the
MultiFabs holding the solution are created after the
BoxArray has been pruned, no data will be allocated in
those regions. This capability has been demonstrated for asimpli ﬁed chemical looping reactor geometry by the MFiX-
Figure 5. Sketch illustrating embedded boundary representation
of geometry.
Figure 6. Example of complex geometry generated with
constructive solid geometry from simple shapes.
Listing 6. Example of constructing a complex implicit function
based on simple objects (sphere, box, and cylinder) with
transformations (intersection, union, and difference).
Zhang et al. 521
Exa project (see Figure 7 for an example of how mesh
pruning becomes even more effective as the base mesh isresolved).
9.4. Particle-wall interactions
In cases where particles interact with EB surfaces, AMReX
provides the functionality to build a level set, with values
deﬁned at nodes, that represents the distance function from
the EB surface. Particle-wall collisions can then be com-puted based on the level set values at the nodes surroundingthe cell holding the particle. In some applications, such asMFiX-Exa, the level set can be de ﬁned at a ﬁner level than
the rest of the simulation in order to exploit a ﬁner repre-
sentation of the geometry for calculating collisions.
10. Linear solvers
A key feature of a number of applications based on AMReXis that they require solution of one or more linear systems ateach time step. AMReX includes native single-level andmulti-AMR-level geometric multigrid and Krylov (CG and
BiCG) solvers for nodal or cell-centered data, as well asinterfaces to external solvers such as those in hypre ( Falgout
et al., 2006 ) and PETSc ( Balay et al., 2019 ). The external
solvers can be called at the ﬁnest multigrid level, or as a
“bottom solve ”where the native solver coarsens one or
more levels, and then calls the external solver to reduce the
residual by a speci ﬁed tolerance at that level.
Discretizations include variable coef ﬁcient Poisson and
Helmholtz operators as well as the full viscous tensor forﬂuid dynamics (requiring solution of a multi-component
system). The AMReX multigrid solvers include aggregation(merging boxes at a level in the multigrid hierarchy toenable additional coarsening within the V-cycle) and con-solidation (reducing the number of ranks to reduce com-
munication costs at coarser multigrid levels) strategies to
reduce total cost.
The linear solvers in AMReX also support complex
geometries represented using the EB approach. For cell-centered data, the stencil uses EB information such as theboundary normal and employs a geometric coarseningstrategy. The nodal linear solver in AMReX is based on aﬁnite-element approach. The construction of the stencil uses
various precomputed moment integrals (e.g.,ÐÐÐ
x
α
yβzYdxdydz), with an algebraic multigrid approach to
coarsening the operator.
Figure 8 shows a weak scaling study of the cell-centered
linear solver for
aαf/C0b=/C1ðβ=fÞ¼rhs (1)
where fis the unknown de ﬁned at cell centers, aandbare
scalars, αis deﬁned at cell centers and may vary in space,
andβis a variable coef ﬁcient de ﬁned on cell faces. The
calculations were performed on Summit with 6 GPUs per
node and on Cori Haswell nodes with 32 CPU cores per
Figure 7. Mesh pruning of a chemical looping reactor geometry.
Shown here are the embedded boundary geometry and the
individual grids at level 0 for a relatively coarse simulation.
Courtesy of MFiX-Exa team.Figure 8. Weak scaling study of linear solver. There are 2563
cells per node.522 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
node. The weak scaling tests had 2563cells per node, and
there were 40963cells for the 4096 nodes jobs on Summit.
On a single node, the GPU run was 6 times faster than theCPU run. The scaling behavior is consistent with thecharacterization that multigrid solvers are communicationheavy especially because of the ﬂoating point operation
performance of GPUs.
11. I/O
AMReX provides a native ﬁle format for plot ﬁles that store
the solution at a given time step for visualization. Plot ﬁles
use a well-de ﬁned format that is supported by a variety of
third-party tools for visualization. AMReX providesfunctions that directly write plot ﬁles from mesh and particle
objects. Mesh and particle plot ﬁles are written indepen-
dently for improved ﬂexibility and performance. AMReX
also provides users the option to use HDF5 for data analysisand visualization.
Writing a plot ﬁle requires coordination between MPI
ranks to prevent overwhelming the I/O system with toomany simultaneous writes to the ﬁle system. AMReX has
implemented multiple output methodologies to provide
efﬁcient I/O across a variety of applications and simula-
tions. A static output pattern prints in a predeterminedpattern that eliminates unnecessary overhead, which isuseful for well-balanced or small simulations. A dynamicoutput pattern improves write ef ﬁciency for complex cases
by assigning ranks to coordinate the I/O in a task-likefashion. Finally, asynchronous output assigns the writingto a background thread, allowing the computation tocontinue uninterrupted while the write is completed on a
stored copy of the data. The I/O output methodology and otherstandard features, such as the number of simultaneous writes,can be chosen through run-time and compile-time ﬂags.
Asynchronous I/O is currently the targeted I/O method
for exascale systems because it is a portable methodologythat substantially reduces I/O impact on total run time.
AMReX ’s native Async I/O has reduced write time by a
factor of around 80 on full-scale Summit simulations, asshown in Figure 9 . However, asynchronous I/O requires a
scalable MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE implementation to
achieve the best results. Scalable Async I/O requires onethread passing zero-size messages while another threadperforms its own communication with as little overhead aspossible. On systems where MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE
implementations scale poorly, asynchronous I/O may not be
the best choice.
AMReX also provides the infrastructure, examples, and
documentation to allow applications to write checkpointﬁles for simulation restarts. Each application requires a
unique set of data to restart successfully that is not known toAMReX, such as run time determined constants or any pre-calculated datasets that cannot be easily reconstructed.
Therefore, each application has to build their own check-
point system. However, numerous examples and helpfulfunctions are provided to help facilitate its construction.
11.1. Visualization
The AMReX plot ﬁle format is supported by Paraview, Visit,
and yt. AMReX also supports a native visualization tool,
Figure 9. Weak scaling study of possible MPI implementations for Async I/O. Async I/O requires a zero-size message between
I/O ranks. A variety of possibilities were tested while AMReX Reduction calls amrex::Min() andamrex::Max() are called
continuously on another thread to test MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE overhead. The results show only MPI_IBarrier yields scalable
results. MPI_IBarrier ’s performance is equivalent to less than 2% overhead on full-scale Summit.Zhang et al. 523
AMRVis ( AMRVis, 2020 ), which users and developers ﬁnd
useful for testing, debugging, and other quick-and-dirtyvisualization needs. The AMREX team is working withthe ALPINE and Sensei teams, part of the ECP SoftwareTechnologies, to provide support for in situ data analysisand visualization (see, e.g., Biswas et al. (2020) ). Prelim-
inary interfaces to both exist in the AMReX git repo.
12. Software engineering
AMReX is fully open source; source code, documentation,tutorials, and a gallery of examples are all hosted on Github
(https://amrex-codes.github.io/amrex/ ). AMReX supports
building applications with both GNUMake and CMake andcan also be built as a library. Development takes place usinga fork-and-pull request work ﬂow, with stable tags released
monthly. Github CI is used to verify builds with a variety ofcompilers on Windows, Linux, and Mac for each pull re-quest. In addition, a suite of regression tests are performednightly, both on AMReX and on selected AMReX-based
applications. These tests cover both CPU architectures and
NVIDIA GPUs.
In addition, AMReX has been part of the xSDK releases
starting in 2018 and is available through spack. AMReX is alsoone of the software packages featured in the Argonne TrainingProgram for Extreme-Scale Computing (ATPESC) (seehttps://xsdk-project.github.io/MathPackagesTraining2020/lessons/amrex for the AMReX tutorial presented in 2020).
12.1. Pro ﬁling and debugging
Proﬁling is a crucial part of developing and maintaining a
successful scienti ﬁc code, such as AMReX and its ap-
plications. The AMReX community uses a wide variety ofcompatible pro ﬁlers, including VTune, CrayPat, ARM
Forge, Amrvis, and the Nsight suite of tools. AMReXincludes its own lightweight in strumentation-based pro-
ﬁling tool, TinyPro ﬁler. TinyPro ﬁl e rc o n s i s t so faf e w
simple macros to insert scoped timers throughout the
application. At the end of a simulation, TinyPro ﬁler reports
the total time spent in each region, the number of times itwas called, and the variation across MPI ranks. This tool ison by default in many AMReX applications and includesNVTX markers to allow instrumentation when using Nsight.
AMReX ’s make system includes a debug mode with a
variety of useful features for AMReX developers. Debugmode includes array bound checking, detailed built-in as-
sertions, initialization of ﬂoating point numbers to NaNs,
signal handling (e.g., ﬂoating point exceptions), and
backtrace capability for crashes. This combination of fea-tures has proven extremely helpful for catching commonbugs and reducing development time for AMReX users.13. Conclusions and future work
In this article, we have discussed the main features of theAMReX framework for the development of block-structured AMR algorithms. In addition to core capabilityto support data de ﬁned on a hierarchical mesh, AMReX also
provides support for different particle and particle/mesh
algorithms and for an EB representation of complexproblem geometry. We have also discussed linear solversthat are needed to support implicit discretizations andAMReX ’s I/O capabilities that are used to write data for data
analysis and visualization and for checkpoint/restart.
A cross-cutting feature in all AMReX development is the
need to provide performance portability. With the push
toward exascale, we have seen the emergence of a variety of
different architectures with disparate hardware capabilitiesand programming models. AMReX incorporates an ab-straction layer that isolates applications from the details of aparticular architecture without sacri ﬁcing performance. The
framework also provides custom support for parallel re-ductions and memory management. We have shown ex-amples that illustrate that AMReX provides scalable
performant implementations for a range of tasks typically
found in multiphysics applications.
There are a number of additional capabilities that could
be added to AMReX. Currently, the framework is restrictedto one, two, or three spatial dimensions. Extending themethodology to higher dimensions would be relativelystraightforward. In a similar vein, the framework could alsobe generalized to handle mixed dimensions in which dif-
ferent components of the physical model are solved in
different dimensions.
The framework currently assumes grid cells are rectilinear
with an EB representation for complex geometries. A usefulgeneralization to increase geometric capabilities would be toincorporate curvilinear coordinates in which the grid is log-ically rectangular, but the individual cells can be generichexahedra. This type of capability could be further generalized
to a mapped multiblock or overset mesh model in which
multiple curvilinear meshes are coupled in a single simulation.
Finally, one potentially exciting area is interfacing
AMReX with a code generation system. The basic idea hereis to use a symbolic manipulation system that can generatecompilable AMReX code directly from equations. This typeof capability is particularly useful for problems that can bestated concisely mathematically but expand dramatically
when translated into code. We have used a prototype code
generation system for discretization of general relativity anda spectral representation of Boltzmann ’s equation. The
ability to describe complex problems concisely has potentialto further increase the range of applications that can useAMReX.524 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with re-
spect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Thisresearch was supported by the Exascale Computing Project(17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative effort of the U.S. Department ofEnergy Of ﬁce of Science and the National Nuclear Security
Administration. This work was supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Of ﬁce of Science, Of ﬁce of Advanced Scienti ﬁc
Computing Research, and Exascale Computing Project undercontract DE-AC02-05CH11231. This research used resources ofthe National Energy Research Scienti ﬁc Computing Center, a DOE
Ofﬁce of Science User Facility supported by the Of ﬁce of Science
of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, and resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Com-puting Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is
supported by the Of ﬁce of Science of the U.S. Department of
Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725.
ORCID iD
John Bell https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5749-334X
References
Almgren AS, Beckner VE, Bell JB, et al. (2010) CASTRO: a new
compressible astrophysical solver. I. Hydrodynamics and self-
gravity. The Astrophysical Journal 715(2): 1221 –1238.
Almgren AS, Bell JB, Lijewski MJ, et al. (2013) Nyx: a massively
parallel AMR code for computational cosmology. The Astro-
physical Journal 765(1): 39.
AMR-Wind (2020) AMR-wind documentation . Available at:
https://amr-wind.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ .
AMRVis (2020) AMRVis documentation . Available at: https://
amrex-codes.github.io/amrex/docs_html/Visualization.html .
Balay S, Abhyankar S, Adams MF, et al. (2019) PETSc Web Page .
Available at: https://www.mcs.anl.gov/petschttps://www.mcs.anl.
gov/petsc .
Beckingsale DA, Burmark J, Hornung R, et al. (2019) Raja: Portable
performance for large-scale scienti ﬁc applications. In: IEEE/
ACM international workshop on performance, portability andproductivity in HPC (P3HPC), Denver, CO, 22 November 2019,pp. 71 –81. New York: IEEE.
Berger M and Rigoutsos I (1991) An algorithm for point clustering
and grid generation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics 21: 1278 –1286.
Biswas A, Ahrens J, Dutta S, et al. (2020) Feature analysis,
tracking, and data reduction: an application to multiphase re-actor simulation m ﬁx-exa for in-situ use case. Computing in
Science & Engineering 23: 75 –82.Carter Edwards H, Trott CR and Sunderland D (2014) Kokkos:
enabling manycore performance portability through polymor-
phic memory access patterns. Journal of Parallel and Dis-
tributed Computing 74(12): 3202 –3216.
Dubey A, Almgren A, Bell J, et al. (2014a) A survey of high level
frameworks in block-structured adaptive mesh re ﬁnement
packages. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing
74(12): 3217 –3227.
Dubey A, Antypas K, Calder AC, et al. (2014b) Evolution of
ﬂash, a multi-physics scienti ﬁc simulation code for high-
performance computing. The International Journal of High
Performance Computing Applications 28(2): 225 –237.
ExAM (2020) ExaAM: transforming additive manufacturing
through exascale simulation . Available at: https://www.ornl.
gov/project/exaam-transform ing-additive-manufacturing-
through-exascale-simulation .
Falgout RD, Jones JE and Yang UM (2006) The design
and implementation of hypre, a library of parallel high
performance preconditioners. In: Bruaset AM and TveitoA( e d s ) , N u m e r i c a lS o l u t i o no fP a r tial Differential Equa-
tions on Parallel Computers . Springer –Verlag, pp. 267 –
294.
Fryxell B, Olson K, Ricker P, et al. (2000) Flash: an adaptive mesh
hydrodynamics code for modeling astrophysical thermonuclearﬂashes. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 131:
273–334.
Hindmarsh AC, Brown PN, Grant KE, et al. (2005) Sundials.
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 31(3):
363–396.
Merrill D and Garland M (2016) Single-pass parallel pre ﬁx scan
with decoupled lookback . Available at: https://research.nvidia.
com/sites/default/ ﬁles/pubs/2016-03_Single-pass-Parallel-
Preﬁx/nvr-2016-002.pdf .
MFiX-Exa (2020) MFiX-Exa documentation . Available at: https://
amrex-codes.github.io/MFIX-Exa/ .
PeleC (2020) PeleC documentation . Available at: https://pelec.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/ .
PeleLM (2020) PeleLM documentation .https://amrex-combustion.
github.io/PeleLM/ .
Vay J-L, Almgren A, Bell J, et al. (2018) Warp-x: a new exascale
computing platform for beam-plasma simulations. Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Ac-
celerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment909: 476 –479.
Zhang W, Almgren A, Beckner V, et al. (2019) AMReX: a
framework for block-structured adaptive mesh re ﬁnement.
Journal of Open Source Software 4: 1370.
Zhang W, Almgren A, Beckner V, et al. (2020) Amrex docu-
mentation . Available at: https://amrex-codes.github.io/amrex/
docs_html/ .
Zhang W, Almgren A, Day M, et al. (2016) Boxlib with tiling: an
adaptive mesh re ﬁnement software framework. SIAM Journal
on Scienti ﬁc Computing 38(5): S156 –S172.Zhang et al. 525
Author biographies
Weiqun Zhang is a Computer Systems Engineer at Law-
rence Berkeley National Laboratory. He is interested inhigh-performance computing, computational physics, andprogramming in general. Currently, he works on the AM-ReX software framework and WarpX, an advanced elec-tromagnetic PIC code.
Andrew Myers is a Computer Systems Engineer in the
Center for Computational Sciences and Engineering atLawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His work focuseson scalable particle methods for emerging architectures in
the context of adaptive mesh re ﬁnement. He is an active
developer of the AMReX framework and of the electro-magnetic PIC code WarpX.
Kevin Gott is an application performance specialist at
NERSC. His primary focus is supporting the AMReX Co-Design Center as it develops performance-portable solu-tions for next generation exascale supercomputers. His
interests include C++ programming, portable GPU codedesign, MPI performance, and advanced parallel pro-
gramming techniques.
Ann Almgren is a Senior Scientist at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory and the Group Lead of LBL ’s Center
for Computational Sciences and Engineering. Her primaryresearch interest is in computational algorithms for solvingPDEs in a variety of application areas. Her current projectsinclude the development and implementation of new mul-
tiphysics algorithms in high-resolution adaptive mesh codes
that are designed for the latest hybrid architectures. She is aFellow of the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematicsand the Deputy Director of the AMReX Co-Design Center.
John Bell is a Senior Scientist at Lawrence Berkeley Na-
tional Laboratory. His research focuses on the development
and analysis of numerical methods for partial differentialequations arising in science and engineering. He is a Fellowof the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, amember of the National Academy of Sciences, and theDirector of the AMReX Co-Design Center.526 The International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 35(6)
