arXiv:1604.03570v1  [cs.MS]  12 Apr 2016BOXLIB WITH TILING: AN AMR SOFTWARE FRAMEWORK∗
WEIQUN ZHANG†, ANN ALMGREN†, MARCUS DAY†, TAN NGUYEN‡, JOHN SHALF§,ANDDIDEM
UNAT¶
Abstract
In this paper we introduce a block-structured adaptive mesh reﬁn ement (AMR) software framework
that incorporates tiling, a well-known loop transformation. Becaus e the multiscale, multiphysics codes
built in BoxLib are designed to solve complex systems at high resolution , performance on current and next
generation architectures is essential. With the expectation of man y more cores per node on next generation
architectures, the ability to eﬀectively utilize threads within a node is essential, and the current model for
parallelization will not be suﬃcient. We describe a new version of BoxLib in which the tiling constructs are
embedded so that BoxLib-based applications can easily realize expec ted performance gains without extra
eﬀort on the part of the application developer. We also discuss a pat h forward to enable future versions of
BoxLib to take advantage of NUMA-aware optimizations using the TiD A portable library.
1. Introduction. BoxLib is a mature, publicly available, software framework for building massively
parallel block-structured adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR) applica tions [1]. It is one of a number of current
publicly available AMR frameworks; see [16] for an overview. Numerou s application codes are based on
these frameworks and are too many to list here, but sample resear ch codes in use today that are based on
BoxLib include MAESTRO [5, 6, 4, 36, 23] and CASTRO [3, 34, 35] for as trophysicalsimulations, Nyx [2, 21]
for cosmological simulations, LMC [13, 9, 8] for low Mach number comb ustion simulations, SMC [17] for
compressible combustion simulations, as well as codes for moist atmo spheric physics [14, 15] and subsurface
ﬂow [24].
BoxLib contains extensive software support for explicit and implicit g rid-based operations as well as
particle-mesh operation on adaptive hierarchical meshes. Multileve l multigrid solvers are included for cell-
based and node-based data. Multiple time-subcyling modes are supp orted for adaptive mesh simulations.
Most current BoxLib application codes evolve multiscale, multiphysics systems in time by solving systems
of partial diﬀerential equations (PDEs) often accompanied by con straints. Because these codes are designed
to solve complex systems at high resolution, performance on curre nt and next generation architectures is
always of paramount importance.
BoxLib uses a hybrid MPI/OpenMP approach for parallelization, and t he OpenMP parallelism has
traditionally been expressed in the individual loops over cells. BoxLib a pplication codes have demonstrated
good scaling behavior on up to 100,000 cores on current multi-core a rchitectures (see e.g., [3, 22]). However,
with the current trends in system design, the next generation of h igh-performance computing systems will
have node architectures based on many-core processors and no n-uniform memory access (NUMA) designs.
Due to the irregularity of AMR algorithms, a ﬁne-grained loop-level t hreading approach is not expected to
provide eﬃcient parallelism on a node with hundreds or thousands of t hreads. In addition, reducing the cost
of data movement is expected be crucial for performance [31]. In r esponse to these architectural challenges,
†Center for Computational Sciences and Engineering, Lawren ce Berkeley National Laboratory, One Cyclotron Road MS50A-
1148, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. https://ccse.lbl.gov/ Emai l: WeiqunZhang@lbl.gov, ASAlmgren@lbl.gov, MSDay@lbl.g ov
‡Computer Architecture Group, Lawrence Berkeley National L aboratory, One Cyclotron Road MS50A-1148, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA. crd.lbl.gov/departments/computer-scienc e/computer-architecture/staﬀ/tan-thanh-nhat-nguyen, Email: Tan-
Nguyen@lbl.gov
§Computer Science Department, Lawrence Berkeley National L aboratory, One Cyclotron Road MS50A-1148, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA. crd.lbl.gov/departments/computer-science/ , Email: JShalf@lbl.gov
¶Computer Science and Engineering Department, Ko¸ c Univers ity, Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer, Istanbul, Turkey 34450
http://parcorelab.ku.edu.tr Email: dunat@ku.edu.tr
∗This work was supported by the SciDAC Program and the Exascal e Co-Design Program of the DOE Oﬃce of Advanced
Scientiﬁc Computing Research under the U.S. Department of E nergy under contract DE-AC02-05CH11231. This research use d
resources of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Comput ing Center, which is supported by the Oﬃce of Science of the
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH1 1231. Dr. Unat is supported by the Marie Sklodowska Curie
Reintegration Grant by the European Commission, and by the T ubitak Grant No: 215E285. We would like to acknowledge and
thank Brian Friesen for running some of the performance test s and John Bell for many useful discussions concerning tilin g.
1
2
we are adopting a new programming model, tiling, in BoxLib to expose additional parallelism and optimize
data access behavior.
Tiling is a well known loop transformation that has been proven to be u seful in enhancing data locality
and parallelism (e.g., [33, 25]). Tiling reduces the working set size so tha t the working set of a thread can ﬁt
into cache, reducing the number of cache misses. This decreases t he memory traﬃc, resulting in improved
performance. Tiling can also expose more parallelism by multi-dimension ally partitioning data or iteration
space. Previously we added tiling to the BoxLib based SMC code [17] m anually. However, manual tiling of
an application code is both labor intensive and error prone because t here is no standard language construct
for tiling in any of the general-purpose programming languages. In t his paper, we introduce a new version
of BoxLib that embeds tiling in the shared framework rather than in e ach application code. By supporting
tiling in the Boxlib framework itself, application developers using BoxLib do not have to recode any of the
tiling constructs.
In Section 2, we present a brief introduction to tiling. In Section 3, w e give a brief overview of BoxLib
and key abstractions in the pre-tiling version are presented. We th en present the new version of BoxLib with
tiling and discuss the threadingapproach. Severalperformance r esults areshown in Section 4, demonstrating
the improved performance of the tiling approach. In Section 5, we d iscuss our plans for further optimization
of BoxLib using the TiDA portable library [29, 30]. We summarize the re sults of this paper in the ﬁnal
section.
2. Tiling Overview and Related Work. Modern systems contain complex memory hierarchies with
multiple levels of caches and multiple NUMA nodes. It is essential that a software framework like BoxLib
adapt to the increasing number of cores and possibly increasing num ber of NUMA domains in order to be
able to take advantage of the current and future architectures . Tiling, also known as cache blocking, is a
well known program transformation that has proven to be useful in improving data locality and parallelism.
Tiling eliminates some of the memory traﬃc by reducing the size of the w orking set so that there are fewer
cache misses. In addition, it enables high degrees of parallelism throu gh partitioning iteration space into
independent units of execution. At the language level, there is no st andard programming support to express
tiling information in the program. The programmer has to manually tile in dividual loops, which can be very
labor-intensive and error-prone for large codes like the BoxLib-ba sed AMR applications. The most common
way to implement tiling is to partition a nested loop by introducing tiling loops that iterate over tiles and
element loops that iterate over the data elements within a tile.
There is a long list of literature on iteration space tiling to move the bur den from the programmer to
the compiler [33, 10, 26, 12, 18, 27]. Compiler methods rely on static lo op transformations [28], usually in
the form of source-to-source translation. There is only limited sup port for tiling in commercial compilers
because of the code generation complexity. The complexity emerge s primarily from the semantics of existing
programming languages (e.g. C, C++, or Fortran) and the inability in c urrent programming environments
to express essential information required for eﬀective performa nce analysis and safe code transformations
to auto-generate tiled code. It is particularly diﬃcult for AMR codes , where crucial information needed
to optimize data locality is only available at runtime. Our approach here is to decouple tiling from the
individual loops and instead represent it at the data structure leve l within the BoxLib framework.
HTA (Hierarchically Tiled Arrays) [10] oﬀers data structures for de scribing a hierarchy and topology of
tileswherecomputationandcommunicationarerepresentedbyove rloadedarrayoperations. Extendingarray
notations hides many details from the programmer but eventually cr eates performance problems because of
the excessive use of temporary arrays or frequent data layout t ransformations. Adopting HTA in BoxLib
would have meant extensive rewriting of BoxLib and BoxLib-based ap plication codes. TiDA [29, 30], on the
other hand, is a library that allows parameterised data layout and tilin g but does not require restructuring
of the original software framework. We are motivated here by TiDA ’s approach to tiling and have integrated
many features of TiDA into the BoxLib framework.
TiDA introduces two concepts: regionalandlogicaltiling. Figure 1 shows an example of regional tiling.
We denote a rectangular domain in index space as a grid; each grid is tiled into multiple regionswith each
region’s ﬂoating point data allocated contiguously in memory. Each re gion is further split into logical tiles
in iteration space; the logical tile size can be changed dynamically on a lo op-by-loop basis. It should be
emphasized that logical tiles exist only in the iteration space and do no t alter the ﬂoating point data layout
3
Grid
Region
Tile
Fig. 1.Grid, Region and Tile. In this example of regional tiling, th ere are two grids. The grid on the left contains four
regions, and the grid on the right contains two regions. Each region is split into four logical tiles in iteration space. T he
ﬂoating point data are allocated contiguously in each regio n, thus the data within a grid are not in one contiguous block. Note
that logical tiles do not aﬀect the data layout in memory.
in memory. A tiling approach based on the hierarchy of grid, region an d tile is called regional tiling. Logical
tiling is a special case of regional tiling in which each grid contains only on e region. Thus the data on a grid
in logical tiling are contiguous in memory, whereas in regional tiling they are allocated in multiple contiguous
blocks. Regional tiling is intended to address the NUMA nodes and reg ional coherence domains, and is more
general than logical tiling; however it requires data structure cha nges because existing AMR frameworks
usually allocate one contiguous block of memory for the data on each grid. In contrast, logical tiling is easily
adoptable by the underlying framework, because it requires minimal bookkeeping and incurs little overhead
on existing codes.
3. BoxLib. The BoxLib software framework includes both a C ++framework that can call Fortran
subroutines, and an entirely Fortran framework. Both framewor ks have been modiﬁed to use tiling, but we
will present the illustrative examples in C ++only for simplicity.
Fig. 2.Cartoon of AMR grids with two levels of factor 2 reﬁnement. Th e coarsest grid covers the domain with 162cells.
Bold lines represent grid boundaries. The two intermediate resolution grids are at level 1 and the cells are a factor of tw o
ﬁner than those at level 0. The two ﬁnest grids are at level 2 an d the cells are a factor of two ﬁner than the level 1 cells.
Note that there is no direct parent-child connection. The da ta for each grid are contained in an object called FArrayBox ( see
section 3.1). In this example, there are 1, 2 and 2 FArrayBox o bjects on level 0, 1, and 2, respectively. FArrayBox objects on
each level are organized into an object called MultiFab (Mul tiple FArrayBox).
The data in BoxLib is deﬁned on a nested hierarchy of logically rectang ular grids. Recall we use the
4
termgridto refer to a rectangular domain in index space; in the context of blo ck-structured AMR a levelis
composed of a union of (in this case non-intersecting) grids that sh are the same mesh (or cell) spacing. The
ratio of mesh spacings between adjacent levels is typically 2 or 4. Figu re 2 shows a cartoon of AMR grids in
two dimensions with two levels of reﬁnement. One aspect that disting uishes BoxLib from frameworkssuch as
FLASH [19] is that a ﬁne grid does not necessarily have a unique paren t grid. This allows the organizationof
data into relatively large aggregate grids and as a result amortizes t he cost incurred by the irregular nature
of adaptive meshes.
The changes to BoxLib described in this paper focus on data locality a nd parallelism at each level of
reﬁnement independently, thus for the rest of the paper we will co nﬁne ourselves to the geometry of a single
level. However, the fact that a tiling strategy must work in the cont ext of complex multiphysics applications
on adaptive grid hierarchies dictates three necessary features. First, the strategy must work for a union of
grids that are not necessarily of equal size and shape, and that do not necessarily span the entire rectangular
domain. Second, the strategy must be such that the tile size can be modiﬁed depending on the nature of the
loop, as diﬀerent parts of the algorithm may have verydiﬀerent com putational and communication demands.
Finally, the tiling strategy must be suﬃciently lightweight to adapt to t he frequently changing grid structure
at all levels but the coarsest as the simulation evolves.
3.1. BoxLib Without Tiling. Before we discuss the tiling strategy, we describe the data struct ures
and methods for operating on the data on a level in BoxLib without tilin g. In BoxLib, a Boxis the data
structure for a rectangular domain in index space, and a three-dim ensional Box can be represented by six
integers. Each grid is represented by the Box type. A FArrayBox is the data structure that holds the ﬂoating
point data on a single Box. The data can have multiple components (su ch as density and velocity), and
are stored internally as a one-dimensional (1D) array allocated with C++’snewoperator, therefore are
contiguous in memory. The index space information in FArrayBox can be used to reshape the 1D array into
a multi-dimensional array to be used in a Fortran subroutine. We not e that while the grids themselves are
non-intersecting boxes, the data in an FArrayBox may be deﬁned o n a Box larger than the grid if ghost (or
halo)cells areneeded. A MultiFab is the paralleldatastructure containingmultiple FArrayBoxeswhich holds
data on the multiple grids of an AMR level (see ﬁgure 2). The data in a M ultiFab are distributed among
MPI processes. Thus, on each MPI process the MultiFab contains o nly the FArrayBoxobjects owned by this
process, and the process operates only on its local data. For ope rations that require data owned by other
MPI processes, ghost cells are ﬁlled via MPI communications. To redu ce the latency and use the network
bandwidth more eﬃciently, the communication messages are aggreg ated. For the purpose of communication
within each level and between levels, each MPI process has a copy of all the grids.
Many common operations in BoxLib can be performed at the abstrac t level of MultiFab with the data
and implementation details hidden from the application developers. A f ew examples are given below.
// Return the maximum value contained in component 0 of the Mu ltiFab mf
max_val = mf.max(0);
// Fill the ghost cells of each FArrayBox in the MultiFab mf
mf.FillBoundary();
To operate on the data in more application-speciﬁc ways, BoxLib sup plies iterators, called MFIters, over
the FArrayBoxes in a MultiFab. The application developer provides a F ortran subroutine that performs the
operations; each subroutine operates on one grid’s worth of data at a time. For example,
for (MFIter mfi(mf); mfi.isValid(); ++mfi) // Loop over gri ds
{
// Define vbox to be the grid associated with this iteration.
// This "valid" region will be used to define the extent of the data
// that the subroutine will operate on.
const Box& vbox = mfi.validbox();
// Get a reference to the FArrayBox so that we can access
// both the data and the size of the FArrayBox.
5
FArrayBox& fab = mf[mfi];
// Define the double* pointer to the data of this FArrayBox.
double* a = fab.dataPtr();
// Define abox as the Box on which the data in the FArrayBox is d efined.
// Note that "abox" includes ghost cells (if there are any), a nd is thus
// larger than or equal to "vbox".
const Box& abox = fab.box();
// We can now pass the information to a Fortran routine,
// which treats the double* as a multi-dimensional array
// with dimensions specified by the information in "abox".
// We will also pass the index information in "vbox",
// which specifies our "work" region.
// Functions loVect() and hiVect() return the lower and uppe r
// indices of a box, respectively.
f(vbox.loVect(), vbox.hiVect(), a, abox.loVect(), abox. hiVect());
}
The Fortran subroutine might look as shown here:
subroutine f(lo, hi, a, alo, ahi)
integer, intent(in) :: lo(3), hi(3), alo(3), ahi(3)
double precision , intent(inout) :: a(alo(1):ahi(1),alo( 2):ahi(2),alo(3):ahi(3))
integer :: i, j, k
!$OMP PARALLEL DO private(i,j,k)
do k = lo(3), hi(3)
do j = lo(2), hi(2)
do i = lo(1), hi(1)
! ...
end do
end do
end do
!$OMP END PARALLEL DO
end subroutine f
Here, for the sake of simplicity, we have omitted the code that facilit ates calling Fortran subroutines from
C++. In BoxLib, this is usually handled by C preprocessor macros; one ca n also use the ISO CBINDING
module in Fortran 2003. In this example, OpenMP is used on the loop lev el for work sharing among threads.
3.2. BoxLib With Logical Tiling. In the new version of BoxLib1, we introduce the capability for
logical tiling as deﬁned earlier. For backward compatibility the default is to have t iles the same size as (or
larger than) the grids so that tiling is eﬀectively turned oﬀ. In our log ical tiling approach, each grid is
now logically split into tiles (both grids and tiles are of type Box), and th e modiﬁed looping construct is
completely incorporated into the MFIter iterator which now loops ov er each tile in each grid rather than
just over the grids themselves. With logical tiling, the data layout is u nchanged; just the access pattern to
the data is changed. An example of using tiling is shown below.
bool tiling = true;
for (MFIter mfi(mf,tiling); mfi.isValid(); ++mfi) // Loop over tiles
{
// Define the tile of this iteration
// This tile, rather than the grid that the tile is a part of,
// will be used to define the extent of the data
1BoxLib is under active development and all updates are publi cly available through git as soon as they are tested and
committed. By “new version”, we do not refer to any particula r version number.
6
// that the subroutine will operate on.
const Box& tbox = mfi.tilebox();
// Get a reference to the FArrayBox so that we can access
// both the data and the size of the FArrayBox; the FArrayBox
// is unchanged by using tiling
FArrayBox& fab = mf[mfi];
// Define the double* pointer to the data of this FArrayBox.
// The dataPtr of the FArrayBox is unchanged by using tiling.
double* a = fab.dataPtr();
// Define abox as the Box on which the data in the FArrayBox is d efined.
// This is also unchanged by using tiling.
const Box& abox = fab.box();
// We can now pass the information to a Fortran routine.
// We now pass the index information in "tbox" to specify the w ork region.
f(tbox.loVect(), tbox.hiVect(), a, abox.loVect(), abox. hiVect());
}
In this example, the loop controlled by MFIter can be regarded as a n ested loop collapsed into one iteration
space, where the nested loop is composed of an outer loop of grids a nd an inner loop of tiles in a grid. Note
that the code is almost identical to the one in §3.1; the Fortran subroutine and the data pointer passed to
it are unchanged, but the index space on which the subroutine oper ates is now deﬁned by the tile rather
than the grid. Loop tiling is achieved without any modiﬁcation in the ker nel function f. This is important to
application developers using BoxLib since typically the kernels are app lication-speciﬁc. Moreover, any local
arrays in the kernel function can now be the size of the tile rather t han the potentially much larger grid,
thus the working set size is further reduced, resulting in better da ta access patterns.
The MFIter class has several constructors:
MFIter(const MultiFab& mf);
MFIter(const MultiFab& mf, bool do_tiling);
MFIter(const MultiFab& mf, const int tilesize[]);
In the ﬁrst version, each grid has one tile and the tiling is eﬀectively tu rned oﬀ. If the second version is
used, the default tile size (that can be speciﬁed at runtime) is used. The third version provides more control
over the tile size by passing an integer array specifying the tile size in e ach spatial dimension. This allows
applications to use diﬀerent tile sizes in diﬀerent parts of the algorith m, which is essential for maximizing
performance in a complex multiphysics code. The new tilebox member function of MFIter returns a box for
the current tile of the iteration. Additional MFIter member functio ns that are useful for building application
codes include
Box growntilebox(int nghost) const;
Box nodaltilebox(int direction) const;
The function growntilebox returns a grown tile box that includes ghost cells at grid boundaries o nly;
therefore the returned boxes originating from the same grid are s till non-overlapping. This is useful when
the work region includes ghost cells. The function nodaltilebox returns non-overlapping face-type boxes
for tiles, with the face speciﬁed by the integer argument. This func tion is particularlyuseful for ﬁnite-volume
methods where face-based ﬂuxes are often used.
3.3. Threading in BoxLib. BoxLib uses OpenMP for threading. As seen in section 3.1, BoxLib
traditionally used OMP DOin a ﬁne-grained loop-level threading approach. Tiling provides the o pportunity
for a coarse-grained approach for threading, which enables the r emoval of OpenMP constructs from the
individual Fortran routines. For example, OpenMP parallelism at the t ile level can now be achieved by
adding OpenMP pragmas around the MFIter loops:
7
#pragma omp parallel
for (MFIter mfi(mf,true); mfi.isValid(); ++mfi) // Loop ov er tiles
{
const Box& tbox = mfi.tilebox();
FArrayBox& fab = mf[mfi];
double* a = fab.dataPtr();
const Box& abox = fab.box();
f(tbox.loVect(), tbox.hiVect(), a, abox.loVect(), abox. hiVect());
}
Heremfiis a thread private MFIter object because it is created inside an Ope nMP parallel region. Because
an OpenMP parallel region has already started when function f is calle d, we remove the OpenMP directives
in function f unless nested OpenMP parallelism is desired.
When MFIter detects that it is inside an OpenMP parallel region as in th e code above, the iterations
over tiles are shared among OpenMP threads. In our current implem entation, the work scheduling policy is
similar to OpenMP’s static scheduling. Let us consider an example. Sup pose there are four grids of diﬀerent
sizes at a level, and the tile size is such that the ﬁrst and fourth grids are each divided into 4 logical tiles,
while the second and third are divided into 2 logical tiles each. In the tilin g version, the loop body will be
run 12 times in total, as opposed to 4 times in the untiled version. Assu ming four threads are used, thread
0 will work on 3 tiles from the ﬁrst grid, thread 1 on 1 tile from the ﬁrst grid and 2 tiles from the second
grid, and so forth.
In addition to the beneﬁts of tiling itself, this coarse-grained tile-lev el threading approach has several
advantages over the ﬁne-grained loop-level approach shown in Se ction 3.1. First, when individual grids are
small (such as often occurs after multiple coarsenings near the bo ttom of a multigrid V-cycle in a multigrid
solver), there can still be enough parallelism for the tile-level appro ach even though there might not have
been enough without tiling. Second, the tile-level approach has rem oved the need to use OpenMP directives
in the application-speciﬁc Fortran subroutines in most cases, which reduces the chance of application-speciﬁc
OpenMP coding errors. Finally, it reduces thread overhead and syn chronization points because there is only
one OpenMP parallel region as opposed to many parallel regions in the ﬁne-grained loop-level approach.
There could be an even coarser grained grid-level parallelism approa ch, in which the operations on
each grid are performed by only one thread and diﬀerent threads o perate on diﬀerent grids. This grid-level
approach is less desirable than the tile-level approach, because in c omplex AMR applications the boxes
typically have diﬀerent sizes,resulting in load imbalance among threads , and because there will typically
be more threads than grids on many-core architectures unless ma ny small grids are used. Increasing the
amount of parallelism by using many small grids in an AMR framework suc h as BoxLib is not recommended.
It increases the size of the AMR metadata, increases the cost of p erforming box-box intersections needed
to ﬁll ghost cells and copy data between AMR levels, and increases th e actual computation because of the
increased volume of ghost cells. All of the beneﬁts one would achieve with many small grids are achieved by
tiling the grids instead.
Besides providing a backward compatible tiling capability and a coarse- grained tile-level threading ap-
proach, the new version of BoxLib also includes many performance im provements that are made possible
by applying the tiling concept. One such example is the operation of ﬁllin g ghost cells, which involves both
local and remote communications. For data available on its own MPI pr ocess, simple copy operations are
performed, whereas to get data from a remote MPI process, MPI calls must be made. In BoxLib, MPI
messages between processes are aggregated by using buﬀers fo r MPI send and receive calls to reduce com-
munication overhead and to increase the utility of network bandwidt h. Thus the remote communication also
involves local data movement. These local data copy operations ar e usually considered cheap. However, on
a many-core architecture with hundreds of threads, they could b ecome a bottleneck if they are not threaded
or have low parallel eﬃciency, as expected from Amdahl’s law [7]. In Sec tion 4.1, we will present such an
example and demonstrate the improvement from using tiling.
The user function called inside the MFIter loop often dynamically alloca tes its own temporary arrays.
In a multi-threaded environment, this often results in lock content ion and sometimes translation lookaside
8
buﬀer (TLB) misses or even page faults. One way of avoiding these is sues is using Fortran automatic arrays,
which are usually put on the stack instead of the heap by default (se e [32]) for an example of this approach).
Another approach we have implemented in BoxLib is creating thread p rivate memory arenas and allocating
dynamic arrays from the arenas. One advantage of the latter app roach is that it provides the ﬂexibility
of allocating the high-bandwidth on-package memory available on the next generation of chips (e.g., Intel
Knights Landing).
Finally we note that tiling is not always desired or better. The tradition al ﬁne-grained loop-level thread-
ing approach coupled with dynamic scheduling is more appropriate for work with unbalanced loads, such as
calculating chemical reactions in cells by an implicit solver such as VODE [1 1].
4. Performance. In this section, we present several results demonstrating the pe rformance beneﬁts of
tiling in BoxLib. In the ﬁrst test we consider an explicit heat equation s olver built with the BoxLib C ++
framework, and in the second test we use a minimalist version of SMC [1 7] built with the BoxLib Fortran
framework. Unless stated otherwise, we deﬁne speedup as the ra tio of the run time to the corresponding
time in the 1-thread untiled run. Note that MPI is not used in these te sts so that we can accurately measure
the on-node performance impact of tiling.
4.1. Heat Equation Solver. In our tests of tiling in the heat equation solver, the code took 1000 time
steps on a single level using a forward Euler method with second-ord er centered diﬀerences for the spatial
derivatives2. Thedomaincontainedasinglegridwith 1283cells, andperiodicboundarieswereassumedinall
threedimensions. Thecomputationofsecondderivativesinthehea tequationkernelisperformedintwosteps
with three separate loops for the ﬂux components and another loo p for the divergence of the ﬂux. Although
these loops in this memory-bound situation can be fused to improve c ache locality, this implementation is a
typical pattern for application developers without speciﬁc comput er architecture knowledge. This test was
intentionally simple so that the impact of tiling can be clearly identiﬁed.
The ﬁrst test was a series of non-threaded runs carried out on a s ingle core of Edison at the National
Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center (NERSC), using eithe r the default Gnu or Intel compiler. In
these runs we varied the tile size and found that even with no parallelis m, tiling can signiﬁcantly improve
the performance due to the smaller working set size (Table 1). In th is serial test, a factor of 1.8 speedup
(Intel) and a factor of 3.4 speedup (Gnu), due entirely to logical tilin g, were achieved.
Table 1
Impact of tiling on the performance of the heat equation kern el on the Edison machine at NERSC using the Gnu and
Intel compilers. We show the run time and speedup of the compu tational kernel for various tile sizes. The tile size refers to
the number of cells in a logical tile in the x,yandz-direction, respectively.
Tile Size Time - Gnu (s) Speedup - Gnu Time - Intel (s) Speedup - Intel
128×4×4 8.5 3.4 8.7 1.8
128×8×8 9.0 3.2 9.6 1.6
128×16×16 9.6 3.0 10.5 1.5
128×32×32 23.7 1.2 10.4 1.5
128×64×64 24.4 1.2 10.9 1.4
no tiling 28.6 – 15.5 –
We next explored the parallel performance of the tiled heat equatio n solver. We performed a strong
scaling study on Edison, which has 12-core Intel Ivy Bridge proces sors, and used OpenMP for threading.
Figure 3 compares the tiled runs with untiled runs where a tile size of 12 8×4×4 cells was used for all of the
tiled runs. Two diﬀerent threading approaches were used; the tiled runs used the coarse-grained tile-level
threading approach as described in Section 3.2, whereas the untiled runs used the ﬁne-grained loop-level
threading approach described in Section 3.3. The speedup shown in F igure 3 is for the computational kernel
only. In this ﬁgure the tile-level threading clearly demonstrates mu ch better scaling behavior than the loop-
level approach. The 12-thread tiled run was more than 5.3 times fas ter than the 12-thread untiled run, and
2The source code of the test is available at Tutorials/Tiling HeatCin BoxLib.
9
12 4 8 12
Number of Threads02468101214161820SpeedupHeat Equation Kernel (Intel Ivy Bridge)
tiling
no tiling
perfect scaling (tiling)
perfect scaling (no tiling)
Fig. 3.Heat equation kernel speedup on 12-core Intel Ivy Bridge. We compare the results of tiled and untiled runs. A
16.5x speedup was obtained in the 12-thread tiled run.
it had a 16.5x speedup over the single thread untiled run. For the tiled runs, a 9.6x speedup over the single
thread tiled run was obtained with 12 threads. We note that perfec t strong scaling within a socket is diﬃcult
to achieve because Edison has 30 MB L3 cache shared among 12 core s on a processor.
1816 32 60 120
Number of Threads020406080100SpeedupHeat Equation Kernel (Intel KNC)
tiling
no tiling
Fig. 4.Heat equation kernel speedup on 60-core Intel KNC. We compar e the results of tiled and untiled runs. A speedup
of 86x was obtained for the 120-thread tiled run.
A similar strong scaling study of the heat equation was carried out on a single 60-core Intel Knights
Corner processor on NERSC’s Babbage computer. We again observ ed the performance beneﬁt of the tiling
approach with coarse-grained tile-level parallelism over the non-tilin g approach with ﬁne-grained loop-level
parallelism. Figure 4 shows the speedup of the computational kerne l for untiled and tiled runs. The 120-
10
thread tiled run had a speedup of 69x and 86x with respect to the 1- thread tiled and non-tiled runs,
respectively. The 60-core Intel KNC processors on Babbage are capable of spawning 4 hardware threads
per core. The results using 180 and 240 threads are not shown in th e ﬁgure because no speedup of the
computational kernel was obtained beyond 120 threads. In fact the 240-thread run was about 20% slower
than the 120-thread run. We note that no eﬀort was spent on opt imizing the kernel for KNC.
18163260 120 180 240
Number of Threads020406080100120SpeedupHeat Equation Filling Ghost Cells (Intel KNC)
tiling
no tiling
Fig. 5.Speedup in ﬁlling ghost cells in the heat equation solver on 6 0-core Intel KNC. We compare the results of tiled
and untiled runs. A speedup of 126x was obtained for the 240-t hread tiled run.
18163260 120
Number of Threads0.150.200.250.300.350.400.45Fraction of Filling Ghost Cells TimeHeat Equation: Cost of Filling Ghost Cells (Intel KNC)
tiling
no tiling
Fig. 6.Heat equation: cost of ﬁlling ghost cells time on 60-core Int el KNC. We show the ratio of the time spent ﬁlling
ghost cells to the sum of ﬁlling ghost cells and kernel times. Note that a signiﬁcant fraction of the time was spent ﬁlling g host
cells for the untiled runs.
In the strong scaling study described above, we also measured the time to ﬁll ghost cells at the periodic
boundaries. Note again that MPI was not used and the data moveme nt was completely local. The scaling
11
18163260 120 180 240
Number of Threads0102030405060708090SpeedupSMC (Intel KNC)
tiling
no tiling
Fig. 7.SMC speedup on 60-core Intel KNC. We show the speedup of the wh ole run excluding the one-time initialization.
The 180-thread tiled run had a 92x speedup over the single thr ead untiled run.
results for just ﬁlling the ghost cells are shown in Figure 5. The 240-t hread tiled run had a speedup of 96x
and 126x in ﬁlling ghost cells with respect to the 1-thread tiled and non -tiled runs, respectively. Figure 6
shows the fraction of time spent ﬁlling ghost cells deﬁned as ﬁll time / ( ﬁll time + kernel time). It is a
striking reminder of Amdahl’s law [7] that the 120-thread non-tiled ru n spent more than 40% of the time
ﬁlling ghost cells.
4.2. SMC. The SMC code solves the multicomponent, reacting, compressible Na vier-Stokes equations
using a mixture model for species diﬀusion [17]. The spatial derivative s are computed with 8th-order stencils
that span 9 cells in each coordinate direction. Here we use a minimalist v ersion of SMC for performance
testing3. In this minimalist version, Sutherland’s viscosity law is adopted, a con stant Schmidt number is
used for mass diﬀusivity, and a constant Prandtl number is used to compute thermal diﬀusivity. The runs
considered here used a 9-species H 2/O2reaction mechanism [20] and a 3rd-order Runge-Kutta method was
used for time integration. We have previously demonstrated excelle nt scaling behavior of manually tiled
SMC [17]. The version of SMC described here is based on the new versio n of BoxLib described in this paper.
A series of SMC runs were carried out on a single 60-core processor on Babbage. As with the heat
equation solver, the domain contained a single grid of 1283cells and periodic boundaries were assumed in all
three dimensions. The tile size was againchosento be 128 ×4×4in thex,yandz-direction, respectively. For
comparison, we have performed both tiled and untiled runs. As abov e, the tiled runs used the coarse-grained
tile-level threading approach whereas the untiled runs used the ﬁn e-grained loop-level threading approach.
The scaling results are shown in Figure 7. A speedup of 86x was obtain ed for the 180-thread tiled run over
the single thread tiled run, similar to the result obtained with the manu al tiling. Moreover, the best tiled
run was 2.4 times faster than the best untiled run, and a 92x speedu p was obtained for the 180-thread tiled
run over the single thread untiled run. The results demonstrate cle arly that excellent performance can be
obtained using BoxLib with tiling on many-core architectures with mor e than 100 threads.
5. Future Work. Future work for the BoxLib framework includes integrating the TiDA library cur-
rently under development into the BoxLib framework in order to ena ble regional tiling as well as logical
tiling. Regional tiling addresses potential NUMA issues that are likely t o become even more prevalent on
next-generation architectures. Such architectures enable a th read placed on a NUMA domain to access
3The source code of this minimalist version of SMC is availabl e atMiniApps/SMC in BoxLib.
12
remote memory of another domain at a cost of higher latency and low er bandwidth, often referred to as
NUMA eﬀects. One can address NUMA eﬀects by either placing data in the memory local to where most
computations will be carried out, or by moving computations to the N UMA domain that holds the data.
However, neither memory management nor thread management is a trivial task for the application devel-
oper. The approach currently adopted in BoxLib is to place one MPI p rocess per NUMA node and use a
threaded model such as OpenMP within a NUMA node. However, such a model results in higher overhead
for inter-process synchronization (e.g. barrier and reduction), due to more MPI processes, than a model
in which a single MPI process spans multiple NUMA nodes. In addition, MP I often requires additional
memory to buﬀer messages at both the application and system levels . In future architectures we expect to
see a signiﬁcant reduction in memory capacity per core and a substa ntial increase in the number of NUMA
domains per compute node [31]. Regional tiling allows one to respect NU MA eﬀects while operating with
one MPI process per compute node.
48 16 24 32
Number of Threads051015202530SpeedupSMC with Regional Tiling
regional tiling
logical tiling
no tiling
Fig. 8.SMC with regional tiling on Trestles
The TiDA library [29, 30] will provide developers with NUMA-aware tiling and layout abstractions at
the application level and hides details of how regions and tiles are cons tructed, mapped and executed on
various hardware platforms. The layout abstraction manages the memory allocation for regions and keeps
track of their location on physical partitions of the memory. In Figu re 8 we show a performance comparison
betweenprototypelogicalandregionaltilingimplementationsofSMC .Inthisexample,weconductedastrong
scaling study on up to 8 NUMA domains (i.e. 32 cores) of a compute nod e on Trestles, a system at San Diego
Supercomputer Center. It can be seen that when only one NUMA no de (4 cores) is used, the performance of
both implementations matches. However, with more NUMA domains re gional tiling overtakes logical tiling,
and the performance gap expands as the number of NUMA domains in creases. The reason is that regional
tiling reduces NUMA eﬀects by allocating each region on a diﬀerent NUM A node. In particular, with logical
tiling a tile may access remote memory if a neighbor resides in a diﬀerent NUMA domain. Latency costs will
become signiﬁcant when there are many remote memory accesses o n small amounts of data. With regional
tiling, tiles at the boundary exchange ghost cells, realizing higher ban dwidth and amortizing the latency
overhead. In this protoype version of the SMC code, regional tiling achieves 32x the performance over one
thread on 32 cores.
6. Summary. In order to address the performance challenges that will accompa ny next generation
node architectures based on many-core processors with NUMA do mains, we have implemented logical tiling
in BoxLib, a block-structuredadaptive mesh reﬁnement software framework. In this paper we havedescribed
13
howthetilingconstructsareembeddedintheiteratorconstructs inBoxLibsothatBoxLib-basedapplications
can easily realize the expected serial and parallel performance gain s without extra eﬀort on the part of the
applicationdeveloper. Wealsodiscussedapathforwardtoenablefu tureversionsofBoxLibtotakeadvantage
of NUMA-aware optimizations using the TiDA portable library.
REFERENCES
[1] Center for Computational Sciences and Engineering, Law rence Berkeley National Laboratory, BoxLib, software available
athttps://ccse.lbl.gov/BoxLib/ .
[2]A.S. Almgren, J.B. Bell, M.J. Lijewski, Z. Lukic, and E. Van Ande l,Nyx: A massively parallel AMR code for
computational cosmology , APJ, 765 (2013), p. 39.
[3]A. S. Almgren, V. E. Beckner, J. B. Bell, M. S. Day, L. H. Howell, C. C. Joggerst, M. J. Lijewski, A. Nonaka,
M. Singer, and M. Zingale ,CASTRO: A New Compressible Astrophysical Solver. I. Hydrod ynamics and Self-
gravity, ApJ, 715 (2010), pp. 1221–1238.
[4]A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, A. Nonaka, and M. Zingale ,Low Mach number modeling of Type Ia supernovae. III.
Reactions , APJ, 684 (2008), pp. 449–470. paper III.
[5]A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, C. A. Rendleman, and M. Zingale ,Low Mach number modeling of Type Ia supernovae.
I. Hydrodynamics , APJ, 637 (2006), pp. 922–936. paper I.
[6] ,Low Mach number modeling of Type Ia supernovae. II. Energy Ev olution, APJ, 649 (2006), pp. 927–938. paper
II.
[7]Gene M Amdahl ,Validity of the single processor approach to achieving larg e scale computing capabilities , in Proceedings
of the April 18-20, 1967, spring joint computer conference, ACM, 1967, pp. 483–485.
[8]A.J. Aspden, M. S. Day, and J. B. Bell ,Turbulence-chemistry interaction in lean premixed hydrog en combustion , Proc.
Comb. Inst., 35 (2014), pp. 1321–1329.
[9]J.B. Bell, M.S. Day, and M.J. Lijewski ,Simulation of nitrogen emissions in a premixed hydrogen ﬂam e stabilized on
a low swirl burner , Proc. Comb. Inst., 34 (2013), pp. 1173–1182.
[10]Ganesh Bikshandi, Jia Guo, Daniel Hoeflinger, Gheorghe Almas i, Basilio B. Fraguela, Mar ´ıa J. Garzar ´an,
David Padua, and ˜Christoph von Praun ,Programming for parallelism and locality with hierarchica lly tiled arrays ,
in Proceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGPLAN symposium on Prin ciplesand practice of parallelprogramming, PPoPP
’06, New York, NY, USA, 2006, ACM, pp. 48–57.
[11]P. Brown, G. Byrne, and A. Hindmarsh ,Vode: A variable-coeﬃcient ode solver , SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc and
Statistical Computing, 10 (1989), pp. 1038–1051.
[12]S. Carr and K. Kennedy ,Compiler blockability of numerical algorithms , in Proceedings of the 1992 ACM/IEEE con-
ference on Supercomputing, Supercomputing ’92, Los Alamit os, CA, USA, 1992, IEEE Computer Society Press,
pp. 114–124.
[13]M. S. Day and J. B. Bell ,Numerical simulation of laminar reacting ﬂows with complex chemistry , Combust. Theory
Modelling, 4 (2000), pp. 535–556.
[14]M. Duarte, A. S. Almgren, K. Balakrishnan, J. B. Bell, and D. M. R omps,A numerical study of methods for moist
atmospheric ﬂows: Compressible equations , Mon. Wea. Rev., 142 (2014), pp. 4269–4283.
[15]M. Duarte, A. S. Almgren, and J. B. Bell ,A low mach number model for moist atmospheric ﬂows , J. Atmos. Sci.,
72 (2015), pp. 1605–1620.
[16]A. Dubey, A. Almgren, J. Bell, M. Berzins, S. Brandt, G. Bryan, D. Graves P. Colella, M. Lijewski, F. Loffler,
B. O’Shea, E. Schnetter, B. Van Straalen, and K. Weide ,A survey of high level frameworks in block-structured
adaptive mesh reﬁnement packages , Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 74 (2014), pp. 3217–3227.
[17]Matthew Emmett, Weiqun Zhang, and John B. Bell ,High-order algorithms for compressible reacting ﬂow with
complex chemistry , Combustion Theory and Modelling, 18 (2014), pp. 361–387.
[18]Georgios Goumas et al. ,Automatic parallel code generation for tiled nested loops , in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM
symposium on Applied computing, SAC ’04.
[19]B. Fryxell, K. Olson, P. Ricker, F. X. Timmes, M. Zingale, D. Q. Lamb, P. MacNeice, R. Rosner, J. W. Truran,
and H. Tufo ,FLASH: An adaptive mesh hydrodynamics code for modeling ast rophysical thermonuclear ﬂashes ,
Astrophysical Journal Supplement, 131 (2000), pp. 273–334 .
[20]Juan Li, Zhenwei Zhao, Andrei Kazakov, and Frederick L. Dryer ,An updated comprehensive kinetic model of
hydrogen combustion , International Journal of Chemical Kinetics, 36 (2004), pp . 566–575.
[21]Zarija Lukic, Casey Stark, Peter Nugent, Martin White, Avery Meiksin, and Ann Almgren ,The lyman-alpha
forest in optically-thin hydrodynamical simulations , MNRAS, 446 (2015), pp. 3697–3724.
[22]C. M. Malone, A. Nonaka, S. E. Woosley, A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, S. Dong, and M. Zingale ,The deﬂagration
stage of chandrasekhar mass models for type ia supernovae. i . early evolution , The Astrophysical Journal, 782 (2014),
p. 11.
[23]A. Nonaka, A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, M. J. Lijewski, C. M. Malone, a nd M. Zingale ,MAESTRO:an adaptive low
mach number hydrodynamics algorithm for stellar ﬂows , APJ:sup, 188 (2010), pp. 358–383. paper V.
[24]George Shu Heng Pau, John B Bell, Ann S Almgren, Kirsten M Fagnan, and Michael J Lijewski ,An adaptive
mesh reﬁnement algorithm for compressible two-phase ﬂow in porous media , Computational Geosciences, 16 (2012),
pp. 577–592.
[25]Gabriel Rivera and Chau-Wen Tseng ,Tiling optimizations for 3d scientiﬁc computations , in Proceedings of the 2000
14
ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing, SC ’00, Washington , DC, USA, 2000, IEEE Computer Society.
[26]Gabriel Rivera and Chau Wen Tseng ,Tiling optimizations for 3d scientiﬁc computations , in Proceedings of the
2000 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing, Supercomputi ng ’00, Washington, DC, USA, 2000, IEEE Computer
Society.
[27]Yonghong Song and Zhiyuan Li ,New tiling techniques to improve cache temporal locality , SIGPLAN Not., 34 (1999),
pp. 215–228.
[28]Didem Unat, Xing Cai, and Scott B. Baden ,Mint: realizing CUDA performance in 3D stencil methods with annotated
C, in Proceedings of the international conference on Superco mputing, ICS ’11, New York, NY, USA, 2011, ACM,
pp. 214–224.
[29]Didem Unat, Cy Chan, Weiqun Zhang, John Bell, and John Shalf ,Tiling as a durable abstraction for parallelism and
data locality , Workshop on Domain-Speciﬁc Languages and High-Level Fram eworks for High Performance Computing,
(November 18, 2013).
[30]Didem Unat, Tan Nguyen, Weiqun Zhang, MuhammedNufail Farooqi, Burak Bastem, GeorgeMichelogiannakis,
Ann Almgren, and John Shalf ,Tida: High-level programming abstractions for data locali ty management , in
Supercomputing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Spring er Berlin Heidelberg, 2016.
[31]Didem Unat, John Shalf, Torsten Hoefler, Thomas Schulthess, An shu Dubey (Editors), et al. ,Programming
Abstractions for Data Locality , tech. report, 04 2014.
[32]Antonio Valles and Weiqun Zhang ,Optimizing for reacting navier-stokes equations , in High Performance Parallelism
Pearls Volume One: Multicore and Many-core Programming App roaches, James Reinders and James Jeﬀers, eds.,
Morgan Kaufmann, 2014.
[33]M. Wolfe ,More iteration space tiling , in Proceedings of the 1989 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercom puting, Super-
computing ’89, New York, NY, USA, 1989, ACM, pp. 655–664.
[34]W. Zhang, L. Howell, A. Almgren, A. Burrows, and J. Bell ,Castro: A new compressible astrophysical solver. ii.
gray radiation hydrodynamics , APJ:sup, 196 (2011), p. 20.
[35]W. Zhang, L. Howell, A. Almgren, A. Burrows, J. Dolence, and J. Bel l,Castro: A new compressible astrophysical
solver. iii. multigroup radiation hydrodynamics , APJ:sup, 204 (2013), p. 7.
[36]M. Zingale, A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, A. Nonaka, and S. E. Woosley ,Low mach number modeling of Type Ia
supernovae. IV. White dwarf convection , APJ, 704 (2009), pp. 196–210.
