Porting WarpX to GPU-accelerated platforms
A. Myersa, A. Almgrena, L. D. Amorima, J. Bella, L. Fedelie, L. Geb,a, K. Gotta, D. P. Grotec,
M. Hoganb, A. Huebla, R. Jambunathana, R. Lehea, C. Ngb, M. Rowana, O. Shapovala,
M. Thévenetd, J.-L. Vaya, H. Vincentie, E. Yanga, N. Zaïme, W. Zhanga, Y. Zhaoa and E. Zonia
aLawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
bSLAC National Accelerator Laboratory Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
cLawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
dDeutsches Elektronen Synchrotron (DESY), Hamburg, Hamburg 22607, Germany
eLIDYL, CEA-Université Paris-Saclay, CEA Saclay, 91 191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Exascale Computing
Particle-in-Cell Methods
Accelerator Modelling
A B S T R A C T
WarpX is a general purpose electromagnetic particle-in-cell code that was originally designed to run
on many-core CPU architectures. We describe the strategy, based on the AMReX library, followed
to allow WarpX to use the GPU-accelerated nodes on OLCF’s Summit supercomputer, a strategy we
believe will extend to the upcoming machines Frontier and Aurora. We summarize the challenges
encountered, lessons learned, and give current performance results on a series of relevant benchmark
problems.
1. Introduction
WarpX [22] is a fully electromagnetic Particle-in-Cell
(PIC) code that is being developed as part of the US Depart-
ment of Energy’s Exascale Computing Project [9]. Origi-
nally designed for particle accelerator modelling, and in par-
ticular for the study of laser- and beam-driven wakeﬁeld ac-
celerators, it has also been used to study several other topics
in the ﬁeld of laser-plasma interaction, such as probing the
onset of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) in extreme ﬁelds
and laser-ion acceleration.
WarpX implements the well-known electromagnetic PIC
method for solving the motion of relativistic, charged par-
ticles in the presence electromagnetic ﬁelds. In addition,
it also includes support for many advanced features, such
as: perfectly matched layers (PMLs) [18], a pseudo-spectral
(PSATD) Maxwell solver [25], and multi-physics options
such a ionization, QED pair creation [15, 11], a QED vac-
uum polarization solver [6], and binary collisions [17]. WarpX
currently supports 2D, 3D and azimuthally decomposed ge-
ometries [13] and has the ability to operate in a Lorentz-
boosted reference frame [20]. It also includes support for
mesh reﬁnement and dynamic load balancing through the
AMReX library [29, 30].
WarpX was originally designed with many-core archi-
tectures in mind. While the high-level operations such as
time-stepping and MPI parallelization were implemented in
C++ using AMReX data structures, the core PIC operations,
ORCID(s): 0000-0001-8427-8330 (A. Myers); 0000-0003-2103-312X (A.
Almgren); 0000-0002-1445-0032 (L.D. Amorim); 0000-0002-7215-4178 (L.
Fedeli); 0000-0003-3244-5525 (K. Gott); 0000-0002-4057-8582 (D.P. Grote);
0000-0003-1943-7141 (A. Huebl); 0000-0001-9432-2091 (R. Jambunathan);
0000-0002-3656-9659 (R. Lehe); 0000-0003-2406-1273 (M. Rowan);
0000-0003-4003-4507 (O. Shapoval); 0000-0001-7216-2277 (M. Thévenet);
0000-0002-0040-799X (J.-L. Vay); 0000-0002-9839-2692 (H. Vincenti);
0000-0002-9319-4216 (E. Yang); 0000-0002-9582-5894 (N. Zaïm);
0000-0001-8092-1974 (W. Zhang); 0000-0003-4362-3630 (Y. Zhao);
0000-0001-5662-4646 (E. Zoni)
such as current deposition, ﬁeld gathering, and various par-
ticle pushers and ﬁeld solvers, were handled by the PICSAR
library of Fortran kernels [24]. These routines were highly
optimized for the Intel’s Knight’s Landing (KNL) architec-
ture found on supercomputers such as NERSC’s Cori and
ALCF’s Theta platforms and featured hand-vectorized ver-
sions of the core PIC operations. Related works presenting
early adoptions of accelerator hardware in PIC codes are pre-
sented in Refs. [3, 4, 19, 24].
As the ECP focus shifted towards GPU-based machines
such as Summit, Frontier, and Aurora, the question natu-
rally arose about what to do with the Fortran kernels in PIC-
SAR. CUDA Fortran provided a way forward for platforms
with NVIDIA hardware such as Summit [23], but it was not
clear what support for Fortran would look like on AMD or
Intel hardware. Likewise, OpenACC provided an easy-to-
use model for oﬄoading Fortran routines to NVIDIA GPUs,
but again it was not clear how that would work with non-
NVIDIA GPUs and compiler support was limited to a sin-
gle vendor. OpenMP oﬀered better prospects for portability;
however, early implementations suﬀered performance prob-
lems when compared to OpenACC on NVIDIA hardware.
Ultimately, the choice was made to port the PIC kernels
in PICSAR from Fortran to C++, and to oﬄoad kernels us-
ing either CUDA, HIP, or DPC++, depending on whether
NVIDIA, AMD, Intel hardware is targeted. This removed
any need for mixed language programming, which adds sub-
stantial complication to the codebase and also defeats im-
portant compiler optimizations such as inlining. Addition-
ally, C++ usually gets better and, importantly, earlier sup-
port from vendors, owing to its prominence in industry rel-
ative to Fortran. Finally, CUDA, HIP, and DPC++ oﬀer a
relatively consistent programming model across all three tar-
get platforms. Any implementation diﬀerences between the
three could be entirely hidden in a performance portability
layer; in our case, in the ParallelFor routines in AMReX
(see Section 2.5). In this manner, NIVIDA, AMD, and Intel
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 11
arXiv:2101.12149v2  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Sep 2021
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
GPUs could all be supported, with little to no change to the
WarpX code required.
Today, WarpX is a C++14 application with an optional,
standardized Python interface (PICMI) that can be used to
drive simulations interactively[5]. It runs on NVIDIA, AMD,
and Intel GPUs, in addition to many-core CPU architectures
such as KNL and Fujitsu’s A64FX processors. The core of
the GPU support is the ParallelFor kernel launching method
from AMReX. In what follows, we give a brief overview
of the features in AMReX that WarpX uses to enable par-
allelization and GPU support. Then, we summarize several
key lessons learned from the experience of scaling up the
code on Summit. In particular, we discuss the importance
of memory management, the importance of optimizing for
memory footprint as well as run time, the importance of
optimizing parallel communication routines, and the impor-
tance of properly utilizing the memory hierarchy. Finally, we
will present weak and strong scaling results from a uniform
plasma problem setup and performance numbers obtained
on a plasma acceleration stage benchmark problem.
2. Parallelization
WarpX leverages AMReX for parallelization and GPU
oﬄoading. AMReX is a framework for building block struc-
tured, adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR) applications that is
being developed as part of the Exascale Computing Project.
It provides distributed data containers for storing and iterat-
ing over mesh and particle data deﬁned on AMR hierarchies,
tools for performing parallel communication, inter-level op-
erations, linear solvers, and support for embedded bound-
aries via a cut cell approach. In what follows we summarize
the main features of the hierarchical parallelism model from
AMReX that WarpX uses to run on multi-node CPU and
GPU platforms.
2.1. Domain Decomposition
WarpX makes use of the AMReX-provided tools for de-
scribing block-structured AMR hierarchies. From the sim-
plest to the most complex, these are the IntVect, which de-
scribes a point in an integer index space; the Box, which
describes a region in the same index space and consists of
low- and high- end IntVects plus a third IntVect that de-
scribes the staggering (i.e. is the box cell-, node- face, or
edge-centered); the BoxArray, which describes a collection of
Boxes at a given level of reﬁnement; and the Distribution-
Mapping, which describes how each of those Boxes is mapped
to MPI ranks. Vector<BoxArray> and Vector<Distribution-
Mapping> then describe the mesh hierarchy across multiple
levels of reﬁnement. When used to describe a block in an
AMR hierarchy like this, we use the term ‘grid‘ interchange-
ably with Box.
DistributionMappings can be user-generated, or AMReX
can generate them for a given BoxArray using a number of al-
gorithms: round robin, knapsack, and space ﬁlling curve. By
default, the boxes in WarpX are assigned to MPI ranks ac-
cording to the space ﬁlling curve algorithm, which attempts
to put nearby boxes on the same rank. When dynamic load
balancing is employed, the user can select to use either space
ﬁlling curve, which attempts to maintain spatial locality, or
knapsack, which provides the most ﬂexibility to achieve a
balanced work distribution.
2.2. Mesh and particle data structures
The basic mesh data structure in AMReX is the FArrayBox,
which is a multi-dimensional array of ﬂoating point values
deﬁned on a given Box. FArrayBoxes can be single- or multi-
component and used to represent scalar or vector physical
quantities. In the multi-component case, the components are
stored in a Struct-of-Array style. A distributed collection of
FArrayBoxes deﬁned on a given BoxArray and Distribution-
Mapping is called a MultiFab. The MultiFab data structure is
what stores the core mesh data ﬁelds in WarpX - the electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, the current density, and so forth.
The core particle data structure in AMReX is the Particle,
which consists of a collection of real and integer compo-
nents. In WarpX, the majority of these components are stored
in Struct-of-Array style. The exceptions are the particle po-
sitions and a 64-bit integer identiﬁcation number, which are
stored together in a separate struct.
A ParticleContainer is a distributed collection of parti-
cles associated with a given AMR hierarchy. In WarpX, each
particle species (driver beam, plasma elections, ions, etc...)
is stored in a separate ParticleContainer. Particles are as-
signed to AMR levels and grids based on their physical po-
sitions. The particles in the ParticleContainer can then be
looped over grid-by-grid, and PIC operations such as ﬁeld
gathering, particle pushing, and current deposition can be
performed.
2.3. Hierarchical Parallelism
The above data structures naturally lend themselves to an
“MPI+X" hierarchical approach to parallelism, where "X" is
one of OpenMP, CUDA, HIP, or DPC++ for on-node accel-
erated compute. Boxes are assigned to MPI tasks, and we
typically use a form of over decomposition so that each MPI
tasks is responsible for processing multiple boxes. This al-
lows for more ﬂexible grid structures and also aids load bal-
ancing via swapping boxes across ranks. AMReX provides
MultiFab and ParticleContainer iterator objects that can in-
struct each rank to loop over their local grids, processing
each one in turn. When processing individual grids, an ac-
celerated compute backend such as OpenMP or CUDA can
be selected to perform the actual computations. See the sec-
tion on ParallelFor for more information.
2.4. Parallel Communication routines
Communicating mesh and particle data between MPI ranks
is handled by the AMReX framework. In particular, WarpX
makes use of the following parallel communication routines:
• FillBoundary: This method is used to ﬁll guard cells
for the mesh data (e.g. the electric and magnetic ﬁeld
components, and current / charge densities). It ﬁlls the
data in the guard cells with the (possibly more recent)
data from the corresponding valid cells. Here, "valid"
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
refers to cells that are uniquely owned by the grid in
question, as opposed to ghosted copies that may exist
on other grids / MPI processes.
• SumBoundary: This operation is analogous to Fill-
Boundary, except that instead of copying from valid to
guard, it takes the values in the ghost cells and adds
them to corresponding valid cells. This is useful when
doing current and charge deposition operations on par-
ticles that are near the edge of grid boundaries. These
particles add some of their weights to guard cells, and
these contributions are summed to the proper valid
cell by the SumBoundary method.
• SyncNodal: This function is used when staggered or
node-centered grids are employed to represent physi-
cal quantities. For example, when using the standard
Finite-Diﬀerence Time-Domain (FDTD) Maxwell solver,
WarpX uses the Yee [28] discretization of the ﬁeld
variables, which stores the magnetic ﬁeld components
on cell faces, and the electric ﬁeld and current density
components at cell edges. In this case, some points
in the discretization are represented on multiple grids
and potentially multiple MPI ranks. Note that, unlike
in the cell-centered case, no one grid can be said to
uniquely “own" these points. To prevent spurious nu-
merical eﬀects, it is necessary to synchronize these
shared nodal points so that they have exactly the same
values to machine precision. The SyncNodal method
accomplishes this. Several diﬀerent options for de-
ciding which value to use are implemented, e.g. sim-
ple or weighted averaging. By default, WarpX simply
chooses an arbitrary value as the ‘winner‘ and over-
rides the others.
• ParallelCopy: This is the most general form of par-
allel communication for mesh data in AMReX. It per-
forms copy on intersection from one MultiFab to an-
other, even when those MultiFabs have diﬀerent Box-
Arrays and DistributionMappings. This is needed when,
for example, copying data between diﬀerent levels of
reﬁnement, performing regridding or load balancing
operations, and when copying data between the PML
grids and the rest of the domain.
• Particle Redistribution: This refers to putting parti-
cles back on the proper level and grid after they have
been pushed. AMReX includes two versions of this
operation, one in which the particles are assumed to
only move between neighboring ranks, and another in
which they are allowed to move between any two ranks
in the MPI communicator. The former, local version
is the one used most often during normal time step-
ping, while the latter version is used when performing
load balancing.
These parallel communication routines have been opti-
mized for hybrid CPU/GPU platforms, in particular, Sum-
mit. All run fully on the GPUs, meaning that they do not
trigger any unnecessary host/device copies of mesh or par-
ticle data. Communication has been refactored to reduce
the number of GPU kernels launched, in particular when
performing packing and unpacking operations on MPI send
and receive buﬀers (see Section 3.3). Finally, WarpX can
take advantage of gpu-aware MPI implementations that can
operate directly on device data pointers, if one is available.
This operation can be enabled using a runtime option. When
turned oﬀ, right before the MPI sends are performed, the
data to be sent is copied into pinned memory buﬀers on the
host and the MPI exchanges are made between host memory
buﬀers instead.
2.5. ParallelFor
The core of the GPU support in WarpX consists of a se-
ries of ParallelFor functions provided by the AMReX frame-
work. These are similar to those provided by the perfor-
mance portability layers Kokkos [7] and RAJA [2], but have
been tailored towards the needs of structured grid applica-
tions. These functions separate the details of how the loop is
performed from the loop body, which is supplied as a C++
lambda function describing the operation done on each el-
ement. The amrex::ParallelFor loops are translated into ei-
ther GPU kernel launches or normal host for depending on
a compile-time option. Using this approach, a single code
base can be maintained that can run on CPUs and on multi-
ple GPU platforms. Note, however, that amrex::ParallelFor
does not include OpenMP parallelization - that is included
in the outer, MFIter level instead (see Listing 3).
Listings 1 and 2 show two examples of ParallelFor. The
ﬁrst speciﬁes the loop bounds using an AMReX Box object,
which results in a 3-dimensional loop over the cells in the
box. The second shows a one-dimensional ParallelFor, which
loops over the particles in a grid.
1 amrex : : P a r a l l e l F o r ( bx ,
2
[=] AMREX_GPU_DEVICE ( i n t
i ,
i n t
j ,
i n t
k )
3
{
4
d s t a r r ( i , j , k , 0 ) = s r c a r r ( i , j , k , 0 ) ;
5
}) ;
Listing 1: A ParallelFor routine operating on a single box
of mesh data. In this example case, the threading will be
performed over the cells of a 3-dimensional box. AMReX
arrays use Fortran index order.
1 amrex : : P a r a l l e l F o r ( np ,
2
[=] AMREX_GPU_DEVICE ( i n t
i )
3
{
4
amplitude [ i ] = 0.0 _ r t ;
5
}) ;
Listing 2: A one-dimensional ParallelFor used to thread
over all the particles in a grid.
2.6. Reductions
Parallel reductions are used in several places in WarpX;
for example, in diagnostic functions for particles and beams
that act as an in situ data reduction technique. AMReX pro-
vides functions implementing these reduction operations in-
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
cluding both “oﬀ-node" reductions over MPI ranks and “on-
node" reductions using either CPU threads or on-device ac-
celeration. On GPUs, these functions make use of vendor-
supported libraries such as CUB [16] and rocPRIM [1] when
possible, and otherwise fall back on AMReX’s own imple-
mentation based on on warp-level primitives such as CUDA’s
__shfl_down operation and atomics.
A feature of the AMReX implementation of parallel re-
ductions is that it provides an API for performing multiple
reductions in one pass on any combination of data types and
reduction operators. When running on GPUs, all these op-
erations would be done in a single kernel launch. These re-
ductions operations have been tested and implemented for
CUDA, HIP, and DPC++, as well as on CPU platforms us-
ing OpenMP.
3. Lessons from Summit
In the following section, we summarize some key lessons
learned from our experience of porting WarpX to Summit.
These fall under three main areas: issues relating to memory
management and overall footprint, issues relating to parallel
communication, and ﬁnally, the importance of cache utiliza-
tion on GPU platforms.
3.1. Memory Optimization
With the trend towards GPU computing, the importance
of optimizing codes for memory consumption has increased.
Consider the example of Summit. Summit has 4608 nodes,
each of which has 608 GB of host memory (512 DDR4 +
96 HBM2), for a system total of 2.8 Petabytes. This is con-
siderably more than Cori’s KNL nodes, which have a total
aggregate memory of 1.1 Petabytes. However, if we con-
sider only device memory, each Summit node has 6 NVIDIA
V100 GPUs with 16 GB of memory each, for a total of only
440 TB, substantially less than Cori phase II. This means
that, provided that one wants to run in a mode in which your
problem entirely ﬁts on the GPUs (which is desirable con-
sidering the performance penalties associated with frequent
host / device data transfers), one actually cannot run as big
of a problem on Summit than one could ﬁt on Cori. This
makes reducing the memory footprint of a simulation code
quite impactful in terms of enabling production-level science
calculations.
Reducing the memory footprint can have performance
implications as well. Originally in WarpX, every particle
stored persistent values for the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
interpolated to the particle’s position. In addition to the stor-
age overhead, these values need to be communicated every
time particles change MPI domains, and shuﬄed around in
memory every time particles are sorted (see Section 3.4.2).
Additionally, if the performance of a GPU kernel is memory-
bound, meaning that its performance is limited by the rate
at which data can be transferred from main memory to the
streaming multiprocessors on the GPUs, then increasing the
arithmetic intensity of those kernels by streaming less data
and recomputing values on-the-ﬂy can improve their overall
performance.
Recently, WarpX removed the persistent electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds at the particle positions in favor of re-gathering
these values inside GPU kernels as they are needed. For this,
the ﬁeld gathering and particle pushing kernels were fused
together in the PIC loop, resulting in less data that needed to
be streamed to the processors in a given timestep. In addition
to reducing the memory footprint by a factor of ≈1.6, this
also led to a ≈25% percent speedup in the overall runtime
on several key benchmarks. When the ﬁeld values at the
particle positions are needed more than once in a step, as,
for example, when modelling additional eﬀects such as ion-
ization or using certain diagnostics, the gather operation is
simply performed multiple times. This kind of optimization
has the added beneﬁt that it will likely improve CPU per-
formance as well for computational kernels that are memory
bound, which includes most of the operations performed in
WarpX on modern CPU hardware.
Finally, we are currently exploring other means of re-
ducing the overall memory footprint of WarpX, including
exploiting single / mixed precision and employing compres-
sion.
3.2. Memory Arenas
Dynamic memory allocation is many times more expen-
sive on GPU than CPU architectures. This fact, combined
with common programming patterns involving temporary
variables, can lead to drastic performance penalties on GPU
systems. For example, consider the code in Listing 3. This
snippet demonstrates how to loop over mesh data using the
AMReX data structures. The MFIter object instructs each
MPI rank to loop over the grids it owns. For each grid, we
resize a temporary scratch space called tmp, then launch a
ParallelFor kernel to do some calculations using it. The
Elixir is not essential to the point, but it keeps the scratch
space alive in memory until the kernel is ﬁnished working
with it - this is needed due to the asynchronous nature of
GPU kernel launches. If every call to resize the buﬀer ended
up triggering cudaMalloc and cudaFree calls, this could easily
end up becoming the dominant cost of this routine. Another
place this comes up is in out-of-place sorting and partition-
ing operations, which require a temporary buﬀer in which to
store the result.
One way to mitigate this is to refactor application codes
to keep temporary buﬀers alive in memory instead of letting
them go out of scope. However, this is error-prone and labor-
intensive. Instead, AMReX provides a number of memory
pool classes termed “Arenas", which allocate memory in large
chunks and dole out pieces of it as the application runs. Thus,
even though WarpX makes frequent use of temporary vari-
ables, during most time steps that are no calls to cudaMalloc
or cudaFree.
These Arenas have a number of diﬀerent options for man-
aging memory fragmentation; currently, the default in AM-
ReX is to use a "ﬁrst ﬁt" strategy. AMReX provides memory
arenas that use host, device, pinned, and managed memory.
WarpX uses these Arenas for all of its mesh and particle data
structures.
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
By default, when running on NVIDIA GPUs, WarpX
places all of its core data in an Arena that uses managed
memory. However, this feature is optional, and we have
tested the performance implications of this compared to plac-
ing the data in the device Arena on the 1-node version of the
test problem presented in Section 4.1.1. Overall, the over-
head associated with using uniﬁed memory appears to be
less than 0.2% on NVIDIA V100, likely because WarpX ini-
tializes all data on the device and AMReX uses cudaMemAdvise
to set the preferred location of the managed memory Arena
to “device."
In addition to the managed and device memory arenas,
WarpX also uses a pinned memory arena in a few places
where frequent device-to-host transfers are needed: ﬁrst, when
performing MPI communication when GPU-aware is not avail-
able or is switched oﬀ(see Section 3.3), and second, when
copying simulation data to host for IO.
1 # i f d e f AMREX_USE_OMP
2 #pragma omp
p a r a l l e l
i f
( notInLaunchRegion ( ) )
3 # e n d i f
4 {
5
FArrayBox tmp ;
6
f o r
( MFIter
mfi ( mf ,
TilingIfNotGPU ( ) ) ;
7
mfi . i s V a l i d ( ) ; ++mfi )
8
{
9
const Box& bx = mf . t i l e b o x ( ) ;
10
tmp . r e s i z e ( bx ) ;
11
E l i x i r
e l i = tmp . e l i x i r ( ) ;
12
auto
const& tmp_arr = tmp . a r r a y ( ) ;
13
14
amrex : : P a r a l l e l F o r ( bx ,
15
[=] AMREX_GPU_DEVICE ( i n t
i ,
i n t
j ,
i n t
k )
16
{
17
compute_tmp ( i ,
j ,
k ,
tmp_arr ) ;
18
}
19
}
20 }
Listing 3: Example of an MFIter loop with a ParallelFor
inside. This code can be compiled to run on CPUs with
OpenMP or GPUs with CUDA, HIP, or DPC++.
3.3. Communication Optimization
Once the initial port of WarpX to NVIDIA GPUs was
complete, the initial experience was that compute kernels
such as current deposition and ﬁeld gathering were much
faster on V100 hardware than on KNL. However, the same
was not true for the AMReX parallel communication rou-
tines. The primary reason for this was that the parallel com-
munication routines involved many small, "copy on intersec-
tion" routines between neighboring boxes, especially when
packing and unpacking MPI send and receive buﬀers. These
operations involved little to no computation but launched
many small kernels that packed and unpacked data buﬀers.
Thus, the dominant cost in these routines was the latency as-
sociated with the kernel launches, which could be fused into
a fewer number. After optimization, each MPI rank makes
only 1 kernel launch to pack and unpack its MPI buﬀers,
which led to greatly improved performance on Summit.
Additionally, the parallel communication routines in AM-
ReX were restructured to take advantage of GPU-aware MPI
implementations, in which pointers to device memory can
be passed directly to MPI function calls without any need
to explicitly transfer data to the host ﬁrst. This feature is op-
tional; in the event that it is switched oﬀ, data in MPI buﬀers
is copied to pinned memory before it is passes to MPI. Note
that to date, we have not seen large performance beneﬁt from
using GPUDirect on Summit.
3.4. Cache utilization
As with CPU-based many-core architectures, rearrang-
ing computations so that they properly exploit the memory
hierarchy can lead to signiﬁcant performance increases on
V100 GPUs. In this section, we discuss a case-study in this
eﬀect - speciﬁcally, on how periodic sorting of particle data,
so that it is processed in a cache-friendly way, can greatly
improve the performance of PIC operations like ﬁeld gath-
ering and current deposition on V100. First, however, we
will describe the current deposition algorithm we use, and
how it diﬀers between CPU and GPU runs, in more detail.
3.4.1. Current Deposition
In PIC codes, most operations are straightforward to par-
allelize, since particles can be threaded over and processed
independently without needing to worry about potential race
conditions. Charge and current deposition operations, how-
ever, require special consideration, since when threading over
particles there is the potential for collisions as multiple threads
may attempt to update the same cell simultaneously. Note
that, while most work loops in WarpX are performance portable
between CPU and GPU architectures in the manner of List-
ing 3, the current deposition step is the one area where it does
maintain two diﬀerent code paths through the use of #ifdef
preprocessor directives. This is because the current deposi-
tion is a particularly important routine in terms of computa-
tional cost, and because fundamentally diﬀerent approaches
need to be selected depending on whether we are running
with OpenMP or CUDA/HIP/DPC++ as the parallel back-
end, for reasons discussed below.
In WarpX, our approach to concurrent scatter operations
in particle deposition kernels varies With OpenMP, the par-
ticles on a grid are sorted onto smaller sub-regions called
tiles. This sorting achieves two things: ﬁrst, it is good for
data locality, because particles in the same tile are likely to
contribute to cells that are near each other in memory, and
second, because it allows OpenMP threads to be mapped
to tiles, which can then be processed simultaneously. Each
OpenMP thread deposits particles onto its own, private de-
position buﬀer with enough cells to capture the support of
all the particles on the tile. There is no need for atomics at
this stage, since each thread has its own buﬀer. After de-
position onto the buﬀer is complete, the buﬀer values are
atomically added to the values for the full grid using atomic
writes. Thus atomics are only needed on a per-cell basis, not
a per-particle basis.
The above algorithm requires having few enough OpenMP
threads that each one can have its own private deposition
buﬀer large enough to cover the support of all the particles
in a tile, a strategy sometimes called data duplication. While
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
this is possible when running on a few (say, 8-32) OpenMP
threads, it becomes infeasible on GPUs, which can easily
have tens of thousands of concurrently active threads. Thus,
when running on GPUs, we dispense with thread-private
buﬀers and perform atomic writes directly to global mem-
ory for each particle. The performance of global atomics
on V100 is quite good; however it still beneﬁcial to perform
some sort of sub-box level sorting for the particles on a grid
to achieve better data locality. Unlike with the OpenMP al-
gorithm, this sorting process does not need to be done every
time step, since we only need an approximate ordering to sig-
niﬁcantly improve cache re-use, not a strong guarantee that
all the particles being processed by an OpenMP thread are
inside the thread’s buﬀer region. WarpX has experimented
with thread-block level buﬀers in GPU shared memory to re-
duce the number of global atomic updates; however, none of
these methods have been faster than the one described above.
This details of particle sorting on GPUs are discussed in the
next section.
3.4.2. Particle Sorting
Figure 1:
The eﬀect of sorting interval (i.e., sorting every
푁time steps) and sort bin size on the overall performance
on a uniform plasma benchmark. The 푥-axis shows the sort
interval, while the 푦-axis shows the overall time to take 100
steps, including the cost of the sorting. A sort interval > 100
means that the particles are never re-sorted during the run.
Periodic sorting of the particles on each grid by their spa-
tial locations so that particles that are close to each in mem-
ory also interact with cells that are close to each in memory
exploits the memory hierarchy on the GPUs more eﬀectively
than processing them in an unordered fashion. This is par-
ticularly true in the case that particles are moving with high
velocities, such that they frequently change cells. In that
case, even if particles are sorted at a particular time, they
will rapidly become disordered, leading to signiﬁcant per-
formance degradation in the particle-mesh operations.
Note that we diﬀerentiate between binning, which com-
putes a permutation array that assigns particle indices to cells
with user-deﬁned bin size, and sorting, which uses this per-
Figure 2:
Rooﬂine analysis of the 3rd-order Esirkepov current
deposition [8] kernel in WarpX on a single V100 GPU, with
and without particle sorting. In the memory streaming limit,
three diﬀerent lines are shown, corresponding to the band-
widths of the L1 and L2 caches as well as that for the main
high-bandwidth memory (HBM) on the GPU. Likewise, in the
compute-bound regime, two diﬀerent values are used for the
peak ﬂoating point performance: both with and without taking
advantage of fused multiply-add instructions. The arithmetic
intensity (A.I.) is measured three times for each kernel, using
the memory traﬃc for each level of the memory hierarchy. For
the sorted version, the fact the A.I. is signiﬁcantly lower for
the L1 and L2 data points shows that we are getting substan-
tial reuse in both levels of cache. Conversely, the fact that the
data points are all on top of each for the unsorted run indicates
that without sorting, the degree of reuse is poor.
Figure 3:
Same as Figure 2, but for the fused gather and push
kernel in WarpX. Again, there is substantial cache reuse when
sorting is employed, although for this kernel performance still
appears to be limited by HBM bandwidth, even with sorting.
mutation array to actually reorder the particle data in mem-
ory. Cache utilization requires full sorting, but for many
operations simply knowing the cell-sorted indices is suﬃ-
cient. AMReX provides a GPU-capable implementation of
the counting sort operation that can be used to perform both
of these operations. Internally, it is built using a GPU imple-
mentation of parallel preﬁx sum, which is based on Ref. [14]
and works on NVIDIA, AMD, and Intel GPUs.
In addition to the presented cache-utilization optimiza-
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
tion, sorting and/or binning particles is needed for the mod-
eling of particle-particle interactions. The PIC method by
default only models particle-mesh interaction and mesh up-
dates. WarpX implements binary collisions, which depend
on a prior binning of neighboring particles, to address vari-
ous applications in accelerator and beam physics.
Figure 1 shows the results of a parameter study in which
the bin size and sorting interval were varied. For example, a
bin size of 2푥2푥2 and sorting interval of 4 means that parti-
cles were sorted into 2푥2푥2 supercells every 4 timesteps. On
this problem, the optimal sorting is to sort by cell (i.e. a bin
size of 1푥1푥1 every time step, and the diﬀerence between
sorting optimally and not sorting at all is a factor of ≈7.5,
with most of the improvement comings from the current de-
position and fused gather and push kernels. However, the
very frequent sorting interval for this problem is a special,
because the particles in this problem change cell more often
than in most WarpX applications. Currently, the default in
WarpX, used throughout Section 4, is to sort the particles by
their PIC cell every 4 time steps.
Note that, although the Redistribute() function in AM-
ReX does not maintain this cell-sorted order for particles that
left one grid and been migrated to another, this only applies
to particles that have changed grids - typically only a small
subset of the total that are near the “surface". The bulk of the
particles on a grid will maintain their sorted order in between
Redistribute() calls.
Figures 2 and 3 show the results of a rooﬂine analysis
[26] on the current deposition and fused gather and push ker-
nels in WarpX, which are the two most computationally ex-
pensive operations. Our analysis followed the methodology
of [27]. For this test, we used a uniform plasma setup with
8 particles per cell and gave the particles a large thermal ve-
locity, so that they frequently change cells. To rule out any
transient eﬀects, we ran the problem for a total of 100 steps
and only proﬁled the last one.
The rooﬂine analysis reveals three things. First, as al-
ready demonstrated, sorting the particles gives signiﬁcantly
better performance on V100 GPUs than not sorting them.
Second, the fact that the arithmetic intensity measured us-
ing the memory bandwidth for the L1 and L2 caches is sig-
niﬁcantly lower than for HBM indicates that, in the sorted
run, we are getting signiﬁcant reuse in both of these levels
of cache. Third, the arithmetic intensity for the current de-
position for the sorted run is right up against the streaming
limit for the L2 cache. This indicates that the performance of
this kernel is now limited by the L2 cache bandwidth. Gather
and push, on the other hand, is likely still limited by HBM
bandwidth. Taken together, these results suggest that these
kernels should get signiﬁcantly better performance on the
A100, which has a larger L2 cache and higher HBM band-
width than the V100.
Finally, we note that some PIC codes, such as PICon-
GPU [4], achieve a similar eﬀect by explicitly using shared
memory to cache the electric and magnetic ﬁelds for nearby
particles during ﬁeld gathering, and by using it as a write
buﬀer when performing current deposition. We have exper-
imented with this approach and have thus far not seen an ad-
vantage to doing so. However, work on this front is ongoing.
We note that our approach achieves a similar caching eﬀect
by implicitly relying on L2 rather than explicitly managing
the contents of shared memory buﬀers.
4. Performance Results
In this section, we give current performance results on
Summit for two key benchmark problems. We concentrate
on two areas - the scaling of the code on a uniform plasma
test case and the performance on a plasma accelerator bench-
mark problem.
4.1. Uniform Plasma Scaling
4.1.1. Weak scaling study
In order to test the scaling of WarpX in an idealized set-
ting, as well as to gauge the speedup associated with us-
ing accelerated nodes, we have performed a weak scaling
study using a uniform plasma setup on OLCF’s Summit su-
percomputer. The base case for this scaling study used a
256 x 256 x 384 domain with a box size of 1283 and ran
on 1 Summit node; thus, on the GPU-accelerated runs, each
GPU was responsible for processing two 1283-sized boxes.
Particles were initially distributed uniformly with 8 parti-
cles per cell. We used the standard Yee FDTD solver for
these runs, with Esirkepov current deposition and third or-
der shape functions. For the weak-scaling study, the number
of Summit nodes were doubled with the number of cells (and
particles therein) in the x-, y-, or z- directions, while hold-
ing everything else constant, maintaining a constant work-
load per node. We continued this process up to 2048 nodes
- about half of the Summit machine. Overhead associated
with time spent in problem initialization, memory allocation,
etc., was minimized by running for a total of 100 steps.
The results are shown in Figure 4. We performed the
above scaling study twice, once using all six GPUs per Sum-
mit node, and again using only the POWER9 CPUs. All
CPU and GPU results presented in this section used ver-
sions of WarpX 1 and AMReX 2 from 10/2020, in which
all the optimizations discussed in Section 3 were present.
For both runs, we used 6 MPI tasks per node. For the GPU-
accelerated runs, we used one GPU per MPI task, and for
the CPU-only case, we used 7 OpenMP threads per task,
so that all 42 physical cores on the node were active. Note
that, while the POWER9 CPUs on Summit are capable of
simultaneous multi-threading (SMT) - running more than 1
hardware thread per physical core - we do not typically see
a large beneﬁt to using this feature with WarpX. To con-
ﬁrm this trend for this problem setup, we have taken the 1
node version of the problem above and also run it using 2
(SMT2) and 4 (SMT4) hardware threads per physical core.
The SMT2 run was approximately 2.4% faster than without
using SMT, while the SMT4 run was 13.9% slower. Thus,
while there is a small beneﬁt to using SMT on this prob-
1WarpX Version: 20.10-58-g7a3d26f1cc8d
2AMReX Version: 20.10-47-gf29a0c9d1b8e
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
lem, using it would not signiﬁcantly alter our conclusions
here. Likewise, we have experimented with diﬀerent combi-
nations of MPI ranks per node and OpenMP threads per rank
other than 6-7 split shown in Figure 4. Using one MPI rank
per socket rather than 3 and 21 OpenMP threads per rank
gives the same timings to within 0.2%, while other combi-
nations, such as 1 MPI and 42 OpenMP threads per node,
were slower by a few percentage points.
Using these results, we can characterize both the weak
scaling behavior of the CPU and GPU versions of the WarpX,
as well as see the overall speedup obtained on Summit from
using the accelerators. In both cases, the code scales well
up to 2048 nodes. The weak scaling eﬃciency, deﬁned as
the total time taken for 100 time steps on 1 node divided by
the total taken on 2048 nodes, is 81% for the GPU case and
90% for the CPU case. The diﬀerence in scaling eﬃciency
between the CPU and GPU can be attributed to the fact that,
because the local work is signiﬁcantly faster when using the
V100s, communication operations like FillBoundary, which
are inherently harder to scale, become relatively more expen-
sive. Additionally, the speedup from the accelerators at all
scales tested was a factor of 30. This speedup refers to the
total run time, including time associated with host / device
memory traﬃc and communication, not to isolated compute
kernels.
Figure 4:
Results of a weak scaling study on a uniform plasma
setup on Summit. The x-axis shows the number of Summit
nodes, while the y-axis is the number of particles advances per
nanosecond.
Both the CPU and GPU versions of the code
scale well, and the overall speedup associated with using the
accelerators is ∼30.
4.1.2. Strong Scaling study
We have also conducted a series of strong scaling tests,
using a very similar uniform plasma problem setup as before.
The only diﬀerence is that the box size has been set to 643, to
allow for more GPUs / MPI tasks to be used as the problem is
strong scaled. There is some overhead associated with doing
this, since with smaller boxes, the surface to volume ratio of
ghost cells is higher. Other than the box size, the parameters
are all the same as before.
We use a series of problem sizes, each scaled up a fac-
tor of 2 in terms of the number of cells and particles in the
domain. For each one, we conduct a series of ﬁve runs, in-
creasing the number of MPI tasks by a factor of 2 each time.
Thus, in the ﬁfth run, the run time should have decreased by a
factor of 16, assuming perfect strong scaling. By the time we
have multiplied the number of MPI ranks by 16, this prob-
lem has reached the point where the compute work and the
communication work take approximately the same amount
of time, so we would not expect the problem to scale further
than that.
The smallest scaling study in this series goes from 1 to
16 nodes, while the largest goes from 256 to 4096, nearly the
entire machine. The scaling eﬃciency, deﬁned as the time
a run should take assuming perfect strong scaling within a
problem size and perfect weak scaling from the base prob-
lem size divided by the actual run time, is plotted in Figure 5.
The eﬃciencies after strong scaling by a factor of 16 for each
problem size vary from approximately 70% for the smallest
case to approximately 50% for the largest.
Figure 5:
Strong scaling studies for a variety of problem sizes.
Each tick type refers to a diﬀerent problem size. The 푥-axis
shows the number of Summit nodes, and the 푦-axis shows scal-
ing eﬃciency, deﬁned as the time a run should take assuming
perfect strong scaling within a problem size and perfect weak
scaling from the base problem size, divided by the actual run
time.
4.2. Plasma Acceleration Stage
The above tests were highly idealized in several ways.
First, the workload was perfectly uniform at initial time, and
approximately uniform at later times, subject only to random
ﬂuctuations in the particle density from cell to cell. Second,
the number of particles per cell, 8, is signiﬁcantly higher
than used in some WarpX physics applications. Laser-wake-
ﬁeld acceleration runs, for example, tend to use about 2 par-
ticles per cell on average, which can change the performance
proﬁle of the code. Evaluating WarpX on this important
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
science scenario, the following setup was used, designed to
mimic the essential features of modelling a single plasma-
accelerator stage from WarpX’s challenge problem. This
is also the benchmark problem used to determine a Figure-
of-Merit (FOM) for the ECP Key-Performance Parameters
(KPP) assessment. As a KPP-1 project, WarpX needs to
show at least a factor of 50 increase in its FOM over the
baseline on the eventual Exascale hardware. In this setup,
an accelerated particle beam is tracked using the moving
window feature in WarpX, in which the simulation domain
itself shifts along with the beam at speed c. Additionally,
the entire simulation is modeled in a Lorentz-boosted refer-
ence frame [20], using a gamma boost of 30. New plasma is
continuously injected at the right-hand side of the domain,
while particles that leave the domain at the left-hand side
are removed from the simulation. The plasma consists of
two particles per cell (one electron and one proton), while
the accelerated beam is comprised of electrons. Mitigating
the numerical Cherenkov instability in the modeling of a rel-
ativistically ﬂowing plasma, the Godrey ﬁlter [10] is applied
to the electromagnetic ﬁelds prior to gathering them to par-
ticle positions. For the algorithmic options, we have used
the Vay particle pusher [21], the Cole-Karkkainen-Cowan
FDTD solver [12], and energy-conserving ﬁeld gathering.
We have again used Esirkepov current deposition with 3rd-
order interpolation. To minimize the computer time needed
to conduct these simulations, we initialize the problem to
have the simulation domain entirely ﬁlled with plasma, which
would normally not be the case when modelling an acceler-
ator stage.
To gauge the impact of using accelerated nodes on this
more realistic problem setup, we have measured the FOM on
Summit, deﬁned as
FOM = num_cells ∗(훼+훽∗ppc)∕avg_time_per_it (1)
where num_cells is the total number of grid points in the
simulation, 훼is 0.1 as heuristic grid update cost, 훽is 0.9
for particle update costs, ppc is the average number of par-
ticles per cell, and avg_time_per_it is the average time per
iteration after 1000 steps. We performed this measurement
on 4263 Summit nodes, and extrapolated this number to the
full machine assuming perfect weak scaling. Our baseline
FOM was measured on NERSC’s Cori using the original
Warp code. The baseline FOM value, measured in March
2019 on 6625 Cori nodes and extrapolated to the 9668 on
the full machine, was 2.2e10. The corresponding value on
Summit, measured in July 2020, was 2.5e12, over a factor of
100 improvement from the baseline. Additionally, the best
CPU-only FOM obtained using the WarpX code was 1.0e11,
also measured in March 2019. So there is a substantial (25x)
improvement in our FOM measured with WarpX from using
the GPUs on Summit, as compared to Cori.
These values are all summarized in Table 1, along with
several other data points showing the evolution of WarpX’s
FOM over time. Of particular interest, the improvement from
9/19 to 1/20 was mostly due to optimizations in the parallel
communication routines in AMReX (Section 3.3); from 1/20
to 2/20, the addition of the particle sorting described in Sec-
tion 3.4.2; from 2/20 to 6/20, the reduction in the size of the
particle data described in Section 3.1. Finally, the improve-
ment from 6/20 to 7/20 was solely due to being able to run a
problem with more cells per node. This illustrates the point
made in Section 3.1, about the importance of reducing the
memory footprint on Summit. Both by reducing the size of
the WarpX particle data and by reducing overhead in AM-
ReX’s Arenas, an overall larger problem was able to be run
on Summit, resulting in a more eﬃcient use of the machine.
Table 1
Progress in the FOM measurement over time. Code: either
the original Warp code (baseline) or WarpX. Date: the date
when the measurement was taken. Machine: which computer
was used to make the measurement. 푁푐/Node: the problem
size in number of cells per node. Nodes: how many nodes the
measurement was performed on; there are 9668 KNL nodes on
Cori and 4608 nodes on Summit. FOM: the ﬁgure of merit,
extrapolated from the number of nodes the measurement was
taken on to the full machine.
Code
Date
Machine
N푐/Node
Nodes
FOM
Warp
3/19
Cori
0.4e7
6625
2.2e10
WarpX
3/19
Cori
0.4e7
6625
1.0e11
WarpX
6/19
Summit
2.9e7
32
8.6e11
WarpX
6/19
Summit
2.8e7
1000
7.8e11
WarpX
9/19
Summit
2.3e7
2560
6.8e11
WarpX
1/20
Summit
2.3e7
2560
1.0e12
WarpX
2/20
Summit
2.5e7
4263
1.2e12
WarpX
6/20
Summit
2.0e7
4263
1.4e12
WarpX
7/20
Summit
2.0e8
4263
2.5e12
5. Conclusion
We have summarized the approach taken to porting
WarpX, which was originally designed for many-core CPU
architectures, to take advantage of GPU-accelerated nodes.
This approach is largely based on the amrex::ParallelFor set
of performance portability functions. We have summarized
several key lessons learned from the port, including the im-
portance of managing memory allocation and the code’s over-
all memory footprint, the importance of minimizing the ef-
fect of kernel launch latency in MPI communication rou-
tines, and the importance of utilizing the cache hierarchy on
V100 GPUs. The GPU port of WarpX scales up to nearly
all of Summit and currently sees good improvements in its
KPP-1 ﬁgure of merit on Summit relative to its baseline.
While the measurements of the GPU performance op-
timizations discussed in this paper were all based on the
NVIDIA GPUs on Summit, we expect that most of these
(for example, refactoring code to reduce overhead associated
with kernel launch latency) will generalize to other accelera-
tor architectures, such as AMD’s MI100, as well. Addition-
ally, the optimizations based on reducing memory footprint
and exploiting cache hierarchy should transfer to CPU archi-
tectures as well. Finally, although the AMReX ParallelFor
targets CUDA, HIP, and DPC++ as parallel backends, the
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
optimizations discussed here are not speciﬁc to those pro-
gramming models and should transfer to other approaches
such as OpenACC and OpenMP.
6. Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Exascale Computing
Project (17-SC-20-SC), a joint project of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy’s Oﬃce of Science and National Nuclear Se-
curity Administration, responsible for delivering a capable
exascale ecosystem, including software, applications, and
hardware technology, to support the nation’s exascale com-
puting imperative. This work was performed in part under
the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence
Berkeley
National
Laboratory
under
Contract
DE-AC02-05CH11231, SLAC National Accelerator Labo-
ratory under contract AC02-76SF00515, and Lawrence Liv-
ermore
National
Laboratory
under
Contract
DE-AC52-07NA27344.
This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leader-
ship Computing Facility, which is a DOE Oﬃce of Science
User
Facility
supported
under
Contract
DE-AC05-00OR22725.
WarpX is developed as open source project and avail-
able under https://github.com/ECP-WarpX/WarpX. Presented
code versions correspond to the monthly releases of the code
between 3/2019 and 10/2020. The data that support the ﬁnd-
ings of this study are available under DOI:10.5281/
zenodo.4277941.
References
[1] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., . rocPRIM github page.
https://
github.com/ROCmSoftwarePlatform/rocPRIM. Accessed: 2020-06-14.
[2] Beckingsale, D.A., Burmark, J., Hornung, R., Jones, H., Killian,
W., Kunen, A.J., Pearce, O., Robinson, P., Ryujin, B.S., Scogland,
T.R., 2019.
Raja: Portable performance for large-scale scientiﬁc
applications, in: 2019 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Per-
formance, Portability and Productivity in HPC (P3HPC), pp. 71–81.
doi:10.1109/P3HPC49587.2019.00012.
[3] Burau, H., Widera, R., Hönig, W., Juckeland, G., Debus, A., Kluge,
T., Schramm, U., Cowan, T.E., Sauerbrey, R., Bussmann, M., 2010.
Picongpu: A fully relativistic particle-in-cell code for a gpu cluster.
IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 38, 2831–2839. doi:10.1109/
TPS.2010.2064310.
[4] Bussmann, M., Burau, H., Cowan, T.E., Debus, A., Huebl, A.,
Juckeland, G., Kluge, T., Nagel, W.E., Pausch, R., Schmitt, F.,
Schramm, U., Schuchart, J., Widera, R., 2013.
Radiative signa-
tures of the relativistic kelvin-helmholtz instability, in: Proceedings
of the International Conference on High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, ACM, New York, NY, USA. pp.
5:1–5:12. URL: https://github.com/ComputationalRadiationPhysics/
picongpu, doi:10.1145/2503210.2504564.
[5] CAMPA Collaboration, . Particle-in-cell modeling interface (PICMI).
URL: https://github.com/picmi-standard/picmi.
[6] Carneiro, P., Grismayer, T., Fonseca, R., Silva, L., 2017. Quantum
electrodynamics vacuum polarization solver. arXiv:1607.04224.
[7] Carter Edwards, H., Trott, C.R., Sunderland, D., 2014. Kokkos: En-
abling manycore performance portability through polymorphic mem-
ory access patterns. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing
74, 3202 – 3216. doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2014.07.003. domain-Speciﬁc
Languages and High-Level Frameworks for High-Performance Com-
puting.
[8] Esirkepov, T., 2001. Exact charge conservation scheme for particle-
in-cell simulation with an arbitrary form-factor. Computer Physics
Communications 135, 144 – 153. doi:10.1016/S0010-4655(00)00228-9.
[9] Exascale Computing Project, .
Homepage.
URL: https://www.
exascaleproject.org.
[10] Godfrey, B., Vay, J.L., 2014. Suppressing the numerical cherenkov
instability in fdtd pic codes. Journal of Computational Physics 267.
doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2014.02.022.
[11] Gonoskov, A., Bastrakov, S., Eﬁmenko, E., Ilderton, A., Marklund,
M., Meyerov, I., Muraviev, A., Sergeev, A., Surmin, I., Wallin, E.,
2015. Extended particle-in-cell schemes for physics in ultrastrong
laser ﬁelds: Review and developments. Phys. Rev. E 92, 023305.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.92.023305.
[12] Karkkainen, M., Gjonaj, E., Lau, T., Weiland, T., 2006.
Low-
Dispersionwake Field Calculation Tools, in: Proc. Of International
Computational Accelerator Physics Conference, Chamonix, France.
pp. 35–40.
[13] Lifschitz, A., Davoine, X., Lefebvre, E., Faure, J., Rechatin, C.,
Malka, V., 2009. Particle-in-cell modelling of laser–plasma interac-
tion using fourier decomposition. Journal of Computational Physics
228, 1803 – 1814. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2008.11.017.
[14] Merrill, D., Garland, M., 2016. Single-pass Parallel Preﬁx Scan with
Decoupled Lookback.
Technical Report NVR2016-001. NVIDIA
Research. URL: https://research.nvidia.com/sites/default/files/
pubs/2016-03_Single-pass-Parallel-Prefix/nvr-2016-002.pdf.
[15] Nikishov, A., 1970. Pair production by a constant external ﬁeld. Sov.
Phys. JETP 30, 660.
[16] NVIDIA Research, . Cub documentation. https://nvlabs.github.io/
cub/. Accessed: 2020-06-14.
[17] Pérez, F., Gremillet, L., Decoster, A., Drouin, M., Lefebvre, E., 2012.
Improved modeling of relativistic collisions and collisional ionization
in particle-in-cell codes. Physics of Plasmas 19, 083104. doi:10.1063/
1.4742167.
[18] Shapoval, O., Vay, J.L., Vincenti, H., 2019.
Two-step perfectly
matched layer for arbitrary-order pseudo-spectral analytical time-
domain methods. Computer Physics Communications 235, 102 – 110.
doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2018.09.015.
[19] Surmin, I., Bastrakov, S., Matveev, Z., Eﬁmenko, E., Gonoskov, A.,
Meyerov, I., 2016. Co-design of a particle-in-cell plasma simulation
code for intel xeon phi: A ﬁrst look at knights landing, in: Algorithms
and Architectures for Parallel Processing, Springer International Pub-
lishing, Cham. pp. 319–329. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-49956-7_25.
[20] Vay, J.L., 2007. Noninvariance Of Space- And Time-Scale Ranges
Under A Lorentz Transformation And The Implications For The
Study Of Relativistic Interactions.
Physical Review Letters 98,
130405/1–4. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.130405.
[21] Vay, J.L., 2008. Simulation of beams or plasmas crossing at relativis-
tic velocity. Physics of Plasmas 15, 056701. doi:10.1063/1.2837054.
[22] Vay, J.L., Almgren, A., Amorim, L.D., Bell, J., Ge, L., Gott, K.,
Grote, D.P., Hogan, M., Huebl, A., Jambunathan, R., Lehe, R., Myers,
A., Ng, C., Park, J., Rowan, M., Shapoval, O., Thévenet, M., Zhang,
W., Zhao, Y., Zoni, E., 2020. Toward the modeling of chains of plasma
accelerator stages with WarpX.
Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1596, 012059.
URL: https://github.com/ECP-WarpX/WarpX,
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1596/1/012059.
[23] Vazhkudai, S.S., de Supinski, B.R., Bland, A.S., Geist, A., Sexton,
J., Kahle, J., Zimmer, C.J., Atchley, S., Oral, S., Maxwell, D.E., Lar-
rea, V.G.V., Bertsch, A., Goldstone, R., Joubert, W., Chambreau, C.,
Appelhans, D., Blackmore, R., Casses, B., Chochia, G., Davison, G.,
Ezell, M.A., Gooding, T., Gonsiorowski, E., Grinberg, L., Hanson,
B., Hartner, B., Karlin, I., Leininger, M.L., Leverman, D., Marroquin,
C., Moody, A., Ohmacht, M., Pankajakshan, R., Pizzano, F., Rogers,
J.H., Rosenburg, B., Schmidt, D., Shankar, M., Wang, F., Watson, P.,
Walkup, B., Weems, L.D., Yin, J., 2018. The design, deployment, and
evaluation of the coral pre-exascale systems, in: SC18: International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage
and Analysis, pp. 661–672. doi:10.1109/SC.2018.00055.
[24] Vincenti, H., Lobet, M., Lehe, R., Sasanka, R., Vay, J.L., 2017. An
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 11
Porting WarpX to GPU platforms
eﬃcient and portable simd algorithm for charge/current deposition in
particle-in-cell codes. Computer Physics Communications 210, 145
– 154. doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2016.08.023.
[25] Vincenti, H., Vay, J.L., 2016. Detailed analysis of the eﬀects of stencil
spatial variations with arbitrary high-order ﬁnite-diﬀerence Maxwell
solver. Computer Physics Communications 200, 147–167. doi:10.
1016/j.cpc.2015.11.009.
[26] Williams, S., Waterman, A., Patterson, D., 2009. Rooﬂine: An in-
sightful visual performance model for multicore architectures. Com-
mun. ACM 52, 65–76. doi:10.1145/1498765.1498785.
[27] Yang, C., Kurth, T., Williams, S., 2020. Hierarchical rooﬂine anal-
ysis for gpus: Accelerating performance optimization for the nersc-9
perlmutter system. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Ex-
perience 32, e5547. doi:10.1002/cpe.5547. e5547 cpe.5547.
[28] Yee, K., 1966. Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems
involving maxwell’s equations in isotropic media. IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation 14, 302–307. doi:10.1109/TAP.1966.
1138693.
[29] Zhang, W., Almgren, A., Beckner, V., Bell, J., Blaschke, J., Chan,
C., Day, M., Friesen, B., Gott, K., Graves, D., Katz, M.P., Myers, A.,
Nguyen, T., Nonaka, A., Rosso, M., Williams, S., Zingale, M., 2019.
AMReX: a framework for block-structured adaptive mesh reﬁnement.
Journal of Open Source Software 4, 1370. URL: https://ccse.lbl.
gov/AMReX, doi:10.21105/joss.01370.
[30] Zhang, W., Myers, A., Gott, K., Almgren, A., Bell, J., 2020. Amrex:
Block-structured adaptive mesh reﬁnement for multiphysics applica-
tions. arXiv:2009.12009.
A. Myers et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 11
